Simulations 

Jean Baudrillard 



Translated by Paul Foss. Paul Pattern and Philip Beitchman 
Semiotext[e] 



61983 Semioiextfe] and Jean BaudrilJard 



Primed in the Untied States of America 
1098765432 



Contents 

The Precession of Simulacra 1 

The Orders of Simulacra . 81 



The Precession of Simulacra 



The simulacrum is never that 
which conceals the truth— it is 
the truth which conceals that 
there is none. 
The simulacrum is true. 

Ecclesiaites 



If we were able to take as the finest 
allegory of simulation the Borges tale where 
the cartographers of the Empire draw up a 
map so detailed that it ends up exactly 
covering the territory (but where the decline 
of the Empire sees this map become frayed 
and finally ruined, a few shreds still 
discernible in the deserts — the metaphysical 
beauty of this ruined abstraction, bearing 
witness to an Imperial pride and rotting like a 
carcass, returning to the substance of the 
soil, rather as an aging double ends up being 
confused with the real thing) — then this 
fable has come full circle for us, and now has 
nothing but the discrete charm of second- 
order simulacra. l 



Jean Baudrillard 



Abstraction today is no longer that of 
the map, the double, the mirror or the 
concept. Simulation is no longer that of a 
territory, a referential being or a substance. 
It is the generation by models of a real 
without origin or reality: a hyperreal. The 
territory no longer precedes the map, nor 
survives it. Henceforth, it is the map that 
precedes the territory — PRECESSION OF 
SIMULACRA— it is the map that engenders the 
territory and if we were to revive the fable 
today, it would be the territory whose shreds 
are slowly rotting across the map. It is the 
real, and not the map, whose vestiges subsist 
here and there, in the deserts which are no 
longer those of the Empire, but our own. 
The desert of the real itself. 

In fact, even inverted, the fable is 
useless. Perhaps only the allegory of the 
Empire remains. For it is with the same 
Imperialism that present-day simulators try 
to make the real, all the real, coincide with 
their simulation models. But it is no longer a 
question of either maps or territory. 
Something has disappeared: the sovereign 
difference between them that was the 
abstraction's charm For it is the difference 



The Precession of Simulacra 

which forms the poetry of the map and the 
charm of the territory, the magic of the 
concept and the charm of the real. This 
representational imaginary, which both 
culminates in and is engulfed by the 
cartographer's mad project of an ideal 
coextensivity between the map and the 
territory, disappears with simulation — 
whose operation is nuclear and genetic, and 
no longer specular and discursive. With it 
goes all of metaphysics. No more mirror of 
being and appearances, of the real and its 
concept. No more imaginary coextensivity: 
rather, genetic miniaturisation is the dimen- 
sion of simulation. The real is produced from 
miniaturised units, from matrices, memory 
banks and command models — and with these 
it can be reproduced an indefinite number of 
times. It no longer has to be rational, since it 
is no longer measured against some ideal or 
negative instance. It is nothing more than 
operational. In fact, since it is no longer 
enveloped by an imaginary, it is no longer 
real at all. It is a hyperreal, the product of an 
irradiating synthesis of combinatory models 
in a hyperspace without atmosphere. 

In this passage to a space whose 



Jean Baudrillard 



curvature is no longer that of the real, nor of 
truth, the age of simulation thus begins with 
a liquidation of all referentials— worse: by 
their artificial resurrection in systems of 
signs, a more ductile material than meaning, 
in that it lends itself to all systems of 
equivalence, all binary oppositions and alt 
combinatory algebra. It is no longer a 
question of imitation, nor of reduplication, 
nor even of parody. It is rather a question of 
substituting signs of the real for the real 
itself, that is, an operation todeter every real 
process by its operational double, a metast- 
able, programmatic, perfect descriptive ma- 
chine which provides all the signs of the real 
and short-circuits all its vicissitudes. Never 
again will the real have to be produced — this 
is the vital function of the model in a system 
of death, or rather of anticipated resur- 
rection which no longer leaves any chance 
even in the event of death. A hyperreal 
henceforth sheltered from the imaginary, 
and from any distinction between the real 
and the imaginary, leaving room only for the 
orbital recurrence of models and the 
simulated generation of difference. 



The Precession of Simulacra 



The Divine Irreference of Images 

To dissimulate is to feign not to have 
what one has. To simulate is to feign to have 
what one hasn't. One implies a presence, the 
other an absence. But the matter is more 
complicated, since to simulate is not simply 
to feign: "Someone who feigns an illness can 
simply go to bed and make believe he is ill. 
Some who simulates an illness produces in 
himself some of the symptoms." (Littre) 
Thus, feigning or dissimulating leaves the 
reality principle intact: the difference is 
always clear, it is only masked; whereas 
simulation threatens the difference between 
"true" and "false", between "real" and 
"imaginary". Since the simulator produces, 
"true" symptoms, is he ill or not? He cannot 
be treated objectively either as ill, or as not- 
ill. Psychology and medicine stop at this 
point, before a thereafter undiscoverable 
truth of the illness. For if any symptom can 
be "produced", and can no longer be accepted 
as a fact of nature, then every illness may be 
considered as simulatable and simulated, and 
medicine loses its meaning since it only 
knows how to treat "true" illnesses by their 



Jean Baudrillard 

objective causes. Psychosomatics evolves in a 
dubious way on the edge of the illness 
principle. As for psychoanalysis, it transfers 
the symptom from the organic to the 
unconscious order: once again, the latter is 
held to be true, more true than the former — 
but why should simulation stop at the portals 
of the unconscious? Why couldn't the 
"work" of the unconscious be "produced" in 
the same way as any other symptom in 
classical medicine? Dreams already are. 

The alienist, of course, claims that "for 
each form of the mental alienation there is a 
particular order in the succession of symp- 
toms, of which the simulator is unaware and 
in the absence of which the alienist is 
unlikely to be deceived." This (which dates 
from 1865) in order to save at all cost the 
truth principle, and to escape the spectre 
raised by simulation — namely that truth, 
reference and objective causes have ceased to 
exist. What can medicine do with something 
which floats on either side of illness, on 
either side of health, or with the reduplica- 
tion of illness in a discourse that is no longer 
true or false? What can psychoanalysis do 
with the reduplication of the discourse of the 



The Precession of Simulacra 

unconscious in a discourse of simulation that 
can never be unmasked, since it isn't false 
either? J 

What can the army do with simulators? 
Traditionally, following a direct principle of 
identification, it unmasks and punishes 
them. Today, it can reform an excellent 
simulator as though he were equivalent to a 
"real" homosexual, heart-case or lunatic. 
Even military psychology retreats from the 
Cartesian clarities and hesitates to draw the 
distinction between true and false, between 
the "produced" symptom and the authentic 
symptom. "If he acts crazy so well, then he 
must be mad." Nor is it mistaken: in the sense 
that all lunatics are simulators, and this lack 
of distinction is the worst form of subver- 
sion. Against it classical reason armed itself 
with all its categories. But it is this today 
which again outflanks them, submerging the 
truth principle. 

Outside of medicine and the army, 
favored terrains of simulation, the affair 
goes back to religion and the simulacrum of 
divinity: "I forbad any simulacrum in the 
temples because the divinity that breathes 
life into nature cannot be represented." 



Jean Baudrillard 



Indeed it can. But what becomes of the 
divinity when it reveals itself in icons, when 
it is multiplied in simulacra? Does it remain 
the supreme authority, simply incarnated in 
images as a visible theology? Or is it 
volatilized into simulacra which alone deploy 
their pomp and power of fascination — the 
visible machinery of icons being substituted 
for the pure and intelligible Idea of God? This 
is precisely what was feared by the 
Iconoclasts, whose millenial quarrel is still 
with us today. 3 Their rage to destroy 
images rose precisely because they sensed 
this omnipotence of simulacra, this facility 
they have of effacing God from the 
consciousness of men, and the overwhelm- 
ing, destructive truth which they suggest: 
that ultimately there has never been any God, 
that only the simulacrum exists, indeed that 
God himself has only ever been his own 
simulacrum. Had they been able to believe 
that images only occulted or masked the 
Platonic Idea of God, there would have been 
no reason to destroy them. One can live with 
the idea of a distorted truth. But their 
metaphysical despair came from the idea that 
the images concealed nothing at all, and that 



8 



The Precession of Simulacra 

in fact they were not images, such as the 
original model would have made them, but 
actually perfect simulacra forever radiant 
with their own fascination. But this death of 
the divine referential has to be exorcised at 
all cost. 

It can be seen that the iconoclasts, who 
are often accused of despising and denying 
images, were in fact the ones who accorded 
them their actual worth, unlike the iconolaters, 
who saw in them only reflections and were 
content to venerate God at one remove. But the 
converse can also be said, namely that the 
iconolaters were the most modern and 
adventurous minds, since underneath the idea 
of the apparition of God in the mirror of images, 
they already enacted his death and his 
disappearance in the epiphany of his represent- 
ations (which they perhaps knew no longer 
represented anything, and that they were 
purely a game, but that this was precisely the 
greatest game— knowing also that it is 
dangerous to unmask images, since they 
dissimulate the fact that there is nothing behind 
them). 



Jean Baudrillard 

This was the approach of the Jesuits, 
who based their politics on the virtual 
disappearance of God and on the worldly and 
spectacular manipulation of consciences — 
the evanescence of God in the epiphany of 
power— the end of transcendence, which no 
longer serves as alibi for a strategy 
completely free of influences and signs. 
Behind the baroque of images hides the grey 
eminence of politics. 

Thus perhaps at stake has always been 
the murderous capacity of images, muderers 
of the real, murderers of their own model as 
the Byzantine icons could murder the divine 
identity. To this murderous capacity is 
opposed the dialectical capacity of represent- 
ations as a visible and intelligible mediation 
of the Real. All of Western faith and good 
faith was engaged in this wager on 
representation: that a sign could refer to the 
depth of meaning, that a sign could exchange 
for meaning and that something could 
guarantee this exchange — God, of course. 
But what if God himself can be simulated, 
that is to say, reduced to the signs which 
attest his existence? Then the whole system 
becomes weightless, it is no longer anything 



10 



The Precession of Simulacra 

but a gigantic simulacrum — not unreal, but a 
simulacrum, never again exchanging for 
what is real, but exchanging in itself, in an 
uninterrupted circuit without reference or 
circumference. 

So it is with simulation, insofar as it is 
opposed to representation. The latter starts 
from the principle that the sign and the real 
are equivalent (even if this equivalence is 
Utopian, it is a fundamental axiom). Con- 
versely, simulation starts from the utopia of 
this principle of equivalence, from the radical 
negation of the sign as value, from the sign as 
reversion and death sentence of every 
reference. Whereas representation tries to 
absorb simulation by interpreting it as false 
representation, simulation envelops the 
whole edifice of representation as itself a 
simulacrum. 

This would be the successive phases of 
the image-. 

—it is the reflection of a basic reality 
— it masks and perverts a basic reality 
— it masks the absence of a basic reality 
— it bears no relation to any reality 
whatever it is its own pure simulacrum. 
In the first case, the image is a good 



11 



Jean Baudrillard 



appearance — the representation is of the 
order of sacrament. In the second, it is an evil 
appearance — of the order of malefice. In the 
third, it plays at being an appearance — it is of 
the order of sorcery. In the fourth, it is no 
longer in the order of appearance at all, but of 
simulation. 

The transition from signs which dis- 
simulate something to signs which dissimu- 
late that there is nothing, marks the decisive 
turning point. The first implies a theology of 
truth and secrecy (to which the notion of 
ideology still belongs). The second inaugura- 
tes an age of simulacra and stimulation, in 
which there is no longer any God to 
recognise his own, nor any last judgement to 
separate true from false, the real from its 
artificial resurrection, since everything is 
already dead and risen in advance. 

When the real is no longer what it used 
to be, nostalgia assumes its full meaning. 
There is a proliferation of myths of origin 
and signs of reality; of second-hand truth, 
objectivity and authenticity. There is an 
escalation of the true, of the lived experience; 
a resurrection of the figurative where the 
object and substance have disappeared. And 



12 



The Precession of Simulacra 



there is a panic-stricken production of the 
real and the referential, above and parallel to 
the panic of material production: this is how 
simulation appears in the phase that 
concerns us — a strategy of the real, neo-real 
and hypperral whose universal double is a 
strategy of deterrence. 



Rameses, or Rose-Coloured Resurrection 
Ethnology almost met a paradoxical 
death that day in 1971 when the Phillipino 
government decided to return the few dozen 
Tasaday discovered deep in the jungle, where 
they had lived for eight centuries undisturb- 
ed by the rest of mankind, to their primitive 
state, out of reach of colonists, tourists and 
ethnologists. This was at the initiative of the 
anthropologists themselves, who saw the 
natives decompose immediately on contact, 
like a mummy in the open air. 

For ethnology to live, its object must die. 
But the latter revenges itself by dying for 
having been "discovered", and defies by its 
death the science that wants to take hold of 
it. 

Doesn't every science live on this 



13 



Jean Baudrillard 



paradoxical slope to which it is doomed by 
the evanescence of its object in the very 
process of its apprehension, and by the 
pitiless reversal this dead object exerts on it? 
Like Orpheus it always turns around too 
soon, and its object, like Eurydice, falls back 
into Hades. 

It was against this hades of paradox that 
the ethnologists wanted to protect them- 
selves by cordoning off the Tasaday with 
virgin forest. Nobody now will touch it: the 
vein is closed down, like a mine. Science loses 
a precious capital, but the object will be 
safe — lost to science, but intact in its 
"virginity". It isn't a question of sacrifice 
(science never sacrifices itself: it is always 
murderous), but of the simulated sacrifice of 
its object in order to save its reality principle. 
The Tasaday, frozen in their natural 
element, provide a perfect alibi, an eternal 
guarantee. At this point begins a persistent 
anti-ethnology to which Jaulin, Castaneda 
and Clastres variously belong. In any case, 
the logical evolution of a science is todistance 
itself ever further from its object until it 
dispenses with it entirely: its autonomy 
evermore fantastical in reaching its pure 



14 



The Precession of Simulacra 

form. 

The Indian thereby driven back into the 
ghetto, into the glass coffin of virgin forest, 
becomes the simulation model for all 
conceivable Indians before ethwhgu. The latter 
thus allows itself the luxury of being 
incarnate beyond itself, in the"brute" reality 
of these Indians it has entirely reinvented — 
Savages who are indebted to ethnology for 
still being Savages: what a turn of events, 
what a triumph for this science which 
seemed dedicated to their destruction! 

Of course, these particular Savages are 
posthumous: frozen, cryogenised, sterilised, 
protected to death, they have become referen- 
tial simulacra, and the science itself a pure 
simulation. Same thing at Creusot where, in 
the form of an "open" museum exhibition, 
they have "museumised" on the spot, as 
historical witnesses to their period, entire 
working class quartiers, living metallurgical 
zones, a complete culture including men, 
women and children and their gestures, 
languages and habits — living beings fossil- 
ised as in a snap shot. The museum, instead 
of being curcumscribed in a geometrical 
location, is now everywhere, like a dimen- 



15 



jean Baudriilard 



sion of life itself. Thus ethnology, now freed 
from its object, will no longer be circum- 
scribed as an objective science but is applied 
to all living things and becomes invisible, like 
an omnipresent fourth dimension, that of 
the simulacrum. We are all Tasaday. or Indians 
who have once more become "what they 
used to be", or at least that which ethnology 
has made them — simulacra Indians who 
proclaim at last the universal truth of 
ethnology. 

We all become living specimens under 
the spectral light of ethnology, or of anti- 
ethnology which is only the pure form of 
triumphal ethnology, under the sign of dead 
differences, and of the resurrection of 
differences. It is thus extremely naive tolook 
for ethnology among the Savages or in some 
Third World — it is here, everywhere, in the 
metropolis, among the whites, in a world 
completely catalogued and analysed and then 
artificially revived as though real, in a world of 
simulation; of the hallucination of truth, of 
blackmail by the real, of the murder and 
historical (hysterical) retrospection of every 
symbolic form— a murder whose first 



16 



The Precession of Simulacra 



victims were, noblesse oblige, the Savages, 
but which for a long time now has been 
extended to all Western societies. 

But at the same moment ethnology 
gives up its final and only lesson, the secret 
which kills it (and which the savages 
understood much better): the vengeance of 
the dead. 

The confinement of the scientific object 
is the same as that of theinsaneand thedead. 
And just as the whole of society is hopelessly 
contaminated by that mirror of madness it 
has held out for itself, so science can only die 
contaminated by the death of the object 
which is its inverse mirror. It is science which 
ostensibly masters the object, but it is the 
latter which deeply invests the former, 
following an unconscious reversion, giving 
only dead and circular replies to a dead and 
circular interrogation. 

Nothing changes when society breaks 
the mirror of madness (abolishes asylums, 
gives speech back to the mad, etc.) nor when 
science seems to break the mirror of its 
objectivity (effacing itself before its object, as 
Castaneda does, etc.) and to bow down 
before "differences". Confinement is suc- 



17 



Jean Baudrillard 

ceeded by an apparatus which assumes a 
countless and endlessly diffractabie, multi- 
pliable form. As fast as ethnology in its 
classical institution collapses, it survives in 
an anti-ethnology whose task is to reinject 
fictional difference and Savagery every- 
where, in order to conceal the fact that it is 
this world, our own, which in its way has 
become savage again, that is to say 
devastated by difference and death. 

It is in this way, under the pretext of 
saving the original, that the caves of Lascaux 
have been forbidden to visitors and an exact 
replica constructed 500 metres away, so that 
everyone can see them {you glance through a 
peephole at the real grotto and then visit the 
reconstituted whole). It is possible that the 
very memory of the original caves will fade in 
the mind of future generations, but from 
now on there is no longer any difference: the 
duplication is sufficient to render both 
artificial. 

In the same way the whole of science and 
technology were recently mobilised to save 
the mummy of Rameses II, after it had been 
left to deteriorate in the basement of a 



18 



The Precession of Simulacra 

museum. The West was panic-stricken at the 
thought of not being able to save what the 
symbolic order had been able to preserve for 
40 centuries, but away from the light and 
gaze of onlookers. Rameses means nothing 
to us: only the mummy is of inestimable 
worth since it is what guarantees that 
accumulation means something. Out entire 
linear and accumulative culture would 
collapse if we could not stockpile the past in 
plain view. To this end the pharaohs must be 
brought out of their tombs, and the 
mummies out of their silence. To this end 
they must be exhumed and given military 
honors. They are prey to both science and 
the worms. Only absolute secrecy ensured 
their potency throughout the millenia— 
their mastery over putrefaction, which 
signified a mastery over the total cycle of 
exchange with death. We know better than to 
use our science for the reparation of the 
mummy, that is, to restore a visible order, 
whereas embalming was a mythical labor 
aimed at immortalising a hidden dimension. 

We need a visible past, a visible 
continuum, a visible myth of origin to 
reassure us as to our ends, since ultimately 



19 



jean Baudrillard 



we have never believed in them. Whence that 
historic scene of the mummy's reception at 
Orly airport. All because Rameses was a 
great despot and military figure? Certainly: 
but above all because the order which our 
culture dreams of, behind that defunct 
power it seeks to annex, could have had 
nothing to do with it, and it dreams thus 
because it has exterminated this order by 
exhuming it as if it were our own past. 

We are fascinated by Rameses as 
Renaissance Christians were by the Ameri- 
can Indians: those (human?) beings who had 
never known the word of Christ. Thus, at 
the beginning of colonisation, there was a 
moment of stupor and amazement before 
the very possibility of escaping the universal 
law of the Gospel. There were two possible 
responses: either to admit that this law was 
not universal, or to exterminate the Indians 
so as to remove the evidence. In general, it 
was enough to convert them, or even simply 
to discover them, to ensure their slow 
extermination. 

Thus it would have been enough to 
exhume Rameses to ensure his extermina- 



20 



The Precession of Simulacra 

tion by museumification. For mummies do 
not decay because of worms: they die from 

being transplanted from, a prolonged symbol- 
ic order, which is master over death and 
putrescence, on to an order of history, 
science and museums — our own, which is no 
longer master over anything, since it only 
knows how to condemn its predecessors to 
death and putrescence and their subsequent 
resuscitation by science. An irreparable 
violence towards all secrets, the violence of a 
civilisation without secrets. The hatred by an 
entire civilisation for its own foundations. 

And just as with ethnology playing at 
surrendering its object the better toestablish 
itself in its pure form, so museumification is 
only one more turn in the spiral of 
artificiality. Witness the cloister of St-Michel 
de Cuxa, which is going to be repatriated at 
great expense from the Cloisters in New 
York to be reinstalled on "its original site". 
And everyone is supposed to applaud this 
restitution (as with the "experimental 
campaign to win back the sidewalks" on the 
Champs-Elysees!). However, if the export- 
ation of the cornices was in effect an 
arbitrary act, and if the Cloisters of New 



21 



Jean Baudrillard 



York are really an artificial mosaic of all 
cultures (according to a logic of the capitalist 
centralisation of value), then reimportation 
to the original location is even moreartificial: 
it is a total simulacrum that links up with 
"reality" by a complete circumvolution. 

The cloister should have stayed in New 
York in its simulated environment, which at 
least would have fooled no one- Repatriation 
is only a supplementary subterfuge, in order 
to make out as though nothing had happened 
and to indulge in a retrospective hallucina- 
tion. 

In the same way Americans flatter 
themselves they brought the number of 
Indians back to what it was before their 
conquest. Everything is obliterated only to 
begin again. They even flatter themselves 
they went one better, by surpassing the 
original figure. This is presented as proof of 
the superiority of civilisation: it produces 
more Indians than they were capable of 
themselves. By a sinister mockery, this 
overproduction is yet again a way of 
destroying them: for Indian culture, like all 
tribal culture, rests on the limitation of the 
group and prohibiting any of its"unrestrict- 



22 



The Precession of Simulacra 

ed" growth, as can be seen in the case of Ishi. 
Demographic "promotion", threfore, is just 
one more step towards symbolic extermina- 
tion. 

We too live in a universe everywhere 
strangely similar to the original— here things 
are duplicated by their own scenario. But this 
double does not mean, as in folklore, the 
imminence of death — they are already 
purged of death, and are even better than in 
life; more smiling, more authentic, in light of 
their model, like the faces in funeral parlors. 

Hyperreal and Imaginary 
Disneyland is a perfect model of all the 
entangled orders of simulation. To begin 
with it is a play of illusions and phantasms: 
Pirates, the Frontier, Future World, etc. This 
imaginary world is supposed to be what 
makes the operation successful. But what 
draws the crowds is undoubtedly much more 
the social microcosm, the miniaturised and 
religious revelling in real America, in Us 
delights and drawbacks. You park outside, 
queue up inside, and are totally abandoned 
at the exit. In this imaginary world the only 
phantasmagoria is in the inherent warmth 



23 



Jean Baudrillard 

and affection of the crowd, and in that 
sufficiently excessive number of gadgets 
used there to specifically maintain the 
multitudinous affect. The contrast with the 
absolute solitude of the parking lot— a 
veritable concentration camp — is total. Or 
rather: inside, a whole range of gadgets 
magnetise the crowd into direct flows — 
outside, solitude is directed onto a single 
gadget: the automobile. By an extraordinary 
coincidence (one that undoubtedly belongs 
to the peculiar enchantment of this uni- 
verse), this deep-frozen infantile world 
happens to have been conceived and realised 
by a man who is himself now cryogenised: 
Walt Disney, who awaits his resurrection at 
minus 180 degrees centigrade. 

The objective profile of America, then, 
may be traced throughout Disneyland, even 
down to the morphology of individuals and 
the crowd. All its values are exalted here, in 
miniature and comic strip form. Embalmed 
and pacified. Whence the possibility of an 
ideological analysis of Disneyland (L. Marin 
does it well in Utopies, ieux d'espaces); digest of 
the American way of life, panegyric to 
American values, idealised transposition of a 



24 



The Precession of Simulacra 

contradictory reality. To be sure. But this 
conceals something else, and that "ideologic- 
al" blanket exactly serves to cover over a 
third-order simulation: Disneyland is there to 
conceal the fact that it is the "real" country, 
all of "real" America, which is Disneyland 
(just as prisons are there to conceal the fact 
that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal 
omnipresence, which is carceral). Disneyland 
is presented as imaginary in order to make us 
believe that the rest is real, when in fact all of 
Los Angeles and the America surrounding it 
are no longer real, but of the order of the 
hyperreal and of simulation. It is no longer a 
question of a false representation of reality 
(ideology), but of concealing the fact that the 
real is no longer real, and thus of saving the 
reality principle. 

The Disneyland imaginary is neither 
true nor false; it is a deterrence machine set 
up in order to rejuvenate in reverse the 
fiction of the real. Whence the debility, the 
infantile degeneration of this imaginary. 1 1 is 
meant to be an infantile world, in order to 
make us believe that the adults are 
elsewhere, in the "real" world, and to conceal 
the fact that real childishness is everywhere, 



25 



Jean Baudrillard 



particularly amongst those adults who go 
there to act the child in order to foster 
illusions as to their real childishness. 

Moreover, Disneyland is not the only 
one. Enchanted Village, Magic Mountain, 
Marine World: Los Angeles is encircled by 
these "imaginary stations" which feed 
reality, reality- energy, to a town whose 
mystery is precisely that it is nothing more 
than a network of endless, unreal circula- 
tion — a town of fabulous proportions, but 
without space or dimensions. As much as 
electrical and nuclear power stations, as 
much as film studios, this town, which is 
nothing more than an immense script and a 
perpetual motion picture, needs this old 
imaginary made up of childhood signals and 
faked phantasms for its sympathetic nervous 
system. 

Political Incantation 
Watergate. Same scenario as Disneyland 
(an imaginary effect concealing that reality 
no more exists outside than inside the 
bounds of the artificial perimeter); though 
here it is a scandal effect concealing that 
there is no difference between the facts and 



26 



The Precession of Simulacra 



their denunciation (identical methods are 
employed by the CIA and the Washington Post 
journalists). Same operation, though this 
time tending towards scandal as a means to 
regenerate a moral and political principle, 
towards the imaginary as a means to 
regenerate a reality principle in distress. 

The denunciation of scandal always pays 
homage to the law. And Watergate above all 
succeeded in imposing the idea that Water- 
gate was a scandal — in this sense it was an 
extraordinary operation of intoxication. The 
reinjection of a large dose of political 
morality on a global scale. It could be said 
along with Bourdieu that: "The specific 
character of every relation of force is to 
dissimulate itself as such, and to acquire all 
its force only because it is so dissimulated", 
understood as follows: capital, which is 
immoral and unscrupulous, can only func- 
tion behind a moral superstructure, and 
whoever regenerates this public morality (by 
indignation, denunciation, etc.) spontaneous- 
ly furthers the order of capital, as did the 
Washington Post journalists. 

But this is still only the formula of 
ideology, and when Bourdieu enunciates it. 



27 



Jean Baudrillard 

he takes "relation of force" to mean the truth 
of capitalist domination, and he denounces this 
relation of force as itself a scandal — he 
therefore occupies the same deterministic 
and moralistic position as the Washington Post 
jounalists. He does the same job of purging 
and reviving moral order, an order of truth 
wherein the genuine symbolic violence of the 
social order is engendered, well beyond all 
relations of force, which are only its 
indifferent and shifting configuration in the 
moral and political consciousness of men. 

All that capital asks of us is to receive it 
as rational or to combat it in the name of 
rationality, to receive it as moral or tocombat 
it in the name of morality. For they are 
identical, meaning they can be read another way: 
before, the task was to dissimulate scandal; 
today, the task is to conceal the fact that 
there is none. 

Watergate is not a scandal: this is what must 
be said at all cost, for this is what everyone is 
concerned to conceal this dissimulation 
masking a strengthening of morality, a moral 
panic as we approach the primal (mise en) 
scene of capital; its instantaneous cruelty, its 
incomprehensible ferocity, its fundamental 



28 



The Precession of Simulacra 

immorality — this is what is scandalous, 
unaccountable for in that system of moral 
and economic equivalence which remains the 
axiom of leftist thought, from Enlighten- 
ment theory to communism. Capital doesn't 
give a damn about the idea of the contract 
which is imputed to it — it is a monstrous 
unprincipled undertaking, nothing more. 
Rather, it is "enlightened" thought which 
seeks to control capital by imposing rules on 
it. And all that recrimination which replaced 
revolutionary thought today comes down to 
reproaching capital for not following the 
rules of the game. "Power is unjust, its 
justice is a class justice, capital exploits us, 
etc." — as if capital were linked by a contract 
to the society it rules. It is the left which 
holds out the mirror of equivalence, hoping 
that capital will fall for this phantasmagoria 
of the social contract and fulfull its 
obligation towards the whole of society (at 
the same time, no need for revolution: it is 
enough that capital accept the rational 
formula of exchange). 

Capital in fact has never beeen linked by 
a contract to the society it dominates. It is a 
sorcery of the social relation, it is a challenge to 



29 



Jean Baudrillard 

society and should be responded toas such. It is 
not a scandal to be denounced according to 
moral and economic rationality, but a 
challenge to take up according to symbolic 
law. 

Moebius-Spiralli ng Negativity 
Hence Watergate was only a trap set by 
the system to catch its adversaries — a 
simulation of scandal to regenerative ends. 
This is embodied by the character called 
"Deep Throat", who was said to be a 
Republican grey eminence manipulating the 
leftist journalists in order to get rid of 
Nixon — and why not? All hypotheses are 
possible, although this one is superfluous: 
the work of the Right is done very well, and 
spontaneously, by the Left on its own. 
Besides, it would be naive to see an 
embittered good conscience at work here. 
For the Right itself also spontaneously does 
the work of the Left. All the hypotheses of 
manipulation are reversible in an endless 
whirligig. For manipulation is a floating 
causality where positivity and negativity 
engender and overlap with one another, 
where there is no longer any active or 



30 



The Precession of Simulacra 



passive. It is by putting an arbitrary stop to 
this revolving causality that a principle of 
political reality can be saved. It is by the 
simulation of a conventional, restricted per- 
spective field, where the premises and 
consequences of any act or event are 
calculable, that a political credibility can be 
maintained (including, of course, "objective" 
analysis, struggle, etc.). But if the entire cycle 
of any act or event is envisaged in a system 
where linear continuity and dialectical 
polarity no longer exist, in a field unhinged by 
simulation, then all determination evaporates, 
every act terminates at the end of the cycle 
having benefited everyone and been scatter- 
ed in all directions. 

Is any given bombing in Italy the work of 
leftist extremists, or of extreme right-wing 
provocation, or staged by centrists to bring 
every terrorist extreme into disrepute and to 
shore up its own failing power, or again, is it 
a police-inspired scenario in order to appeal 
to public security? All this is equally true, and 
the search for proof, indeed the objectivity of 
the fact does not check this vertigo of 
interpretation. We are in a logic of simulation 
which has nothing to do with a logic of facts 



31 



Jean Baudrillard 



and an order of reasons. Simulation is 
characterised by a precession of the model, of all 
models around the merest fact— the models 
come first, and their orbital (like the bomb) 
circulation constitutes the genuine magnetic 
field of events. Facts no longer have any 
trajectory of their own, they arise at the 
intersection of the models; a single fact may" 
even be engendered by all the models at once. 
This anticipation, this precession, this short- 
circuit, this confusion of the fact with its 
model (no more divergence of meaning, no 
more dialectical polarity, no more negative 
electricity or implosion of poles) is what each 
time allows for all the possible interpreta- 
tions, even the most contradictory — all are 
true, in the sense that their truth is 
exchangeable, in the image of the models 
from which they proceed, in a generalised 
cycle. 

The communists attack the socialist 
party as though they wanted to shatter the 
Union of the Left. They sanction the idea 
that their reticence stems from a more 
radical political exigency. In fact, it is because 
they don't want power. But do they not want 
it at this conjuncture because it is unfavor- 



32 



The Precession of Simulacra 



able for the Left in general, or because it is 
unfavorable for them within the Union of 
the Left — or do they not want it by 
definition? When Berlinguer declares: "We 
musn't be frightened of seeing the commu- 
nists seize power in Italy", this means 
simultaneously: 

— that there is nothing to fear, since the 
communists, if they come to power, will 
change nothing in its fundamental capitalist 
mechanism, 

— that there isn't any risk of their ever 
coming to power (for the reason that they 
don't want to) — and even if they did take it 
up, they will only ever wield it by proxy, 

— that in fact power, genuine power, no 
longer exists, and hence there is no risk of 
anybody seizing it or taking it over, 

— but more: 1, Berlinguer, am not 
frightened of seeing the communists seize 
power in Italy — which might appear evident, 
but not that much, since 

— this can also mean the contrary (no 
need of psychoanalysis here): I am frightened of 
seeing the communists seize power (and 
with good reason, even for a communist). 

All the above is simultaneously true. 



33 



Jean Baudrillard 



This is the secret of a discourse that is no 
longer only ambiguous, as political discourses 
can be, but that conveys the impossibility of a 
determinate position of power, the impossi- 
bility of a determinate position of discourse. 
And this logic belongs to neither party. It 
traverses all discourses without their want- 
ing it. 

Who will unravel this imbroglio? The 
Gordian knot can at least be cut. As for the 
Moebius strip, if it is split in two, it results in 
an additional spiral without there being any 
possibility of resolving its surfaces (here the 
reversible continuity of hypotheses). Hades 
of simulation, which is no longer one of 
torture, but of the subtle, maleficent, elusive 
twisting of meaning 4 — where even those 
condemned at Burgos are still a gift from 
Franco to Western democracy, which finds in 
them the occasion to regenerate its own 
flagging humanism, and whose indignant 
protestation consolidates in return Franco's 
regime by uniting the Spanish masses 
against foreign intervention? Where is the 
truth in all that, when such collusions 
admirably knit together without their 
authors even knowing it? 



34 



The Precession of Simulacra 



The conjunction of the system and its 
extreme alternative like two ends of a curved 
mirror, the "vicious" curvature of a political 
space henceforth magnetised, circularised, 
reversibilised from right ot left, a torsion 
that is like the evil demon of commutation, 
the whole system, the infinity of capital 
folded back over its own surface: transfinite? 
And isn't it the same with desireand libidinal 
space? The conjunction of desire and value, 
of desire and capital. The conjunction of 
desire and the law — the ultimate joy and 
metamorphosis of the law (which is why it is 
so well received at the moment): only capital 
takes pleasure, Lyotard said, before coming 
to think that we take pleasure in capital. 
Overwhelming versatility of desire in 
Deleure, an enigmatic reversal which brings 
this desire that is "revolutionary by itself, 
and as if involuntarily, in wanting what it 
wants", to want its own repression and to 
invest paranoid and fascist systems? A 
malign torsion which reduces this revolution 
of desire to the same fundamental ambiguity 
as the other, historical revolution. 

All the referentials intermingle their 
discourses in a circular, Moebian compulsion. 



35 



lean Baudrillard 



Not so long ago sex and work were savagely 
opposed terms: today both are dissolved into 
the same type of demand. Formerly the 
discourse on history took its force from 
opposing itself to the one on nature, the 
discourse on desire to the one on power — 
today they exchange their signifiers and 
their scenarios. 

It would take too long to run through 
the whole range of operational negativity, of 
all those scenarios of deterrence which, like 
Watergate, try to regenerate a moribund 
principle by simulated scandal, phantasm, 
murder — a sort of hormonal treatment by 
negativity and crisis. It is always a question 
of proving the real by the imaginary, proving 
truth by scandal, proving the law by 
transgression, proving work by the strike, 
proving the system by crisis and capital by 
revolution, as for that matter proving 
ethnology by the dispossession of its object 
(the Tasaday) — without counting: 

— proving theatre by anti-theatre 

— proving art by anti-art 

— proving pedagogy by anti-pedagogy 

— proving psychiatry by anti-psychiatry, 
etc., etc. 



36 



The Precession of Simulacra 



Everything is metamorphosed into its 
inverse in order to be perpetuated in its 
purged form. Every form of power, every 
situation speaks of itself by denial, in order to 
attempt to escape, by simulation of death, its 
real agony. Power can stage its own murder 
to rediscover a glimmer of existence and 
legitimacy- Thus with the American presi- 
dents: the Kennedys are murdered because 
they still have a politicaldimension. Others — 
Johnson, Nixon, Ford— only had a right to 
puppet attempts, to simulated murders. But 
they nevertheless needed that aura of an 
artificial menace to conceal thay they were 
nothing other than mannequins of power. In 
olden days the king (also the god) had to die — 
that was his strength. Today he does his 
miserable utmost to pretend to die, so as to 
preserve the bkssing of power. But even this is 
gone. 

To seek new blood in its own death, to 
renew the cycle by the mirror of crisis, 
negativity and anti-power: this is the only 
alibi of every power, of every institution 
attempting to break the vicious circle of its 
irresponsibility and its fundamental non- 
existence, of its deja-vu and its deja-mort. 



37 



lean Baudrillard 

Strategy of the Real 

Of the same order as the impossibility of 
rediscovering an absolute level of the real, is 
the impossibility of staging an illusion. 
Illusion is no longer possible, because the real 
is no longer possible. It is the whole political 
problem of the parody, of hy persimulation or 
offensive simulation, which is posed here. 

For example; it would be interesting to 
see whether the repressive apparatus would 
not react more violently to a simulated hold- 
up than to a real one? For the latter only 
upsets the order of things, the right of 
property, whereas the other interferes with 
the very principle of reality. Transgression 
and violence are less serious, for they only 
contest the distribution of the real. Simulation 
is infinitely more dangerous, however, since 
it always suggests, over and above its object, 
that Jaw and order themselves might realty be nothing 
more than a simulation. 

But the difficulty is in proportion to the 
peril. How to feign a violation and put it to 
the test? Go and simulate a theft in a large 
department store: how do you convince the 
security guards that it is a simulated theft? 
There is no "objective" difference: the same 



38 



The Precession of Simulacra 

gestures and the same signs exist as for a real 
theft; in fact the signs incline neither to one 
side nor the other. As far as the established 
order is concerned, they are always of the 
order of the real. 

Go and organise a fake hold-up. Be sure 
to check that your weapons are harmless, 
and take the most trustworthy hostage, so 
that no life is in danger (otherwise you risk 
committing an offence). Demand ransom, 
and arrange it so that the operation creates 
the greatest commotion possible — in brief, 
stay close to the "truth" so as to test the 
reaction of the apparatus to a perfect 
simulation. But you won't succeed the web 
of artificial signs will be inextricably mixed 
up with real elements (a police officer will 
really shoot on sight; a bank customer will 
faint and die of a heart attack; they will really 
turn the phoney ransom over to you) — in 
brief, you will unwittingly find yourself 
immediately in the real, one of whose 
functions is precisely to devour every 
attempt at simulation, to reduce everything 
to some reality— that's exactly how the 
established order is, well before institutions 
and justice come into play. 



39 



Jean Baudrittard 

In this impossibility of isolating the 
process of simulation must be seen the whole 
thrust of an order that can only see and 
understand in terms of some reality, because 
it can function nowhere else. The simulation 
of an offence, if it is patent, will either be 
punished more lightly (because it has no 
"consequences") or be punished as an offence 
to public office (for example, if one triggered 
off a police operation "for nothing") — but 
never as simulation, since it is precisely as such 
that no equivalence with the real is possible, 
and hence no repression either. The 
challenge of simulation is irreceivable by 
power. How can you punish the simulation 
of virtue? Yet as such it is as serious as the 
simulation of crime. Parody makes obedience 
and transgression equivalent, and that is the 
most serious crime, since it cancels out I he 
difference upon which the law is based, The 
established order can do nothing against it, 
for the law is a second-order simulacrum 
whereas simulation is third-order, beyond 
true and false, beyond equivalences, beyond 
the rational distinctions upon which function 
all power and the entire social. Hence, failing 
the real, it is here that we must aim at order. 



40 



The Precession of Simulacra 



This is why order always opts for the 
real. In a state of uncertainty, it always 
prefers this assumption (thus in the army 
they would rather take the simulator as a 
true madman). But this becomes more and 
more difficult, for it is practically impossible 
to isolate the process of simulation, through 
the force of inertia of the real which 
surrounds us, the inverse is also true (and 
this very reversibility forms part of the 
apparatus of simulation and of power's 
impotency): namely, it is now impossible to isolate 
the process of the real, or to prove the real. 

Thus all hold-ups, hijacks and the like 
are now as it were simulation hold-ups, in 
the sense that they are inscribed in advance 
in the decoding and orchestration rituals of 
the media, anticipated in their mode of 
presentation and possible consequences. In 
brief, where they function as a set of signs 
dedicated exclusively to their recurrence as 
signs, and no longer to their "real" goal at all. 
But this does not make them inoffensive. On 
the contrary, it is as hyperreal events, no 
longer having any particular contents or 
aims, but indefinitely refracted by each other 
(for that matter like so-called historical 



41 



Jean Baudrillard 



events strikes, demonstrations, crises, etc. 5 ), 
that they are precisely un verifiable by an 
order which can only exert itself on the real 
and the rational, on ends and means: a 
referential order which can only dominate 
referentials, a determinate power which can 
only dominate a determined world, but 
which can do nothing about that indefinite 
recurrence of simulation, about that weight- 
less nebula no longer obeying the law of 
gravitation of the real — power itself eventu- 
-!'y breaking apart in this space and 
becoming a simulation of power (disconnect- 
ed from its aims and objectives, and dedicated 
to power effects and mass simulation). 

The only weapon of power, its only 
strategy against this defection, is to reinject 
realness and referentiality everywhere, in 
order to convince us of the reality of the 
social, of the gravity of the economy and the 
finalities of production. For that purpose it 
prefers the discourse of crisis, but also — why 
not? — the discourse of desire. "Take your 
desires for reality!" can be understood as the 
ultimate slogan of power, for in a non- 
referential world even the confusion of the 
reality principle with the desire principle is 



42 



The Precession of Simulacra 

less dangerous than contagious hyperreality. 
One remains among principles, and there 
power is always right. 

Hyperreality and simulation are deter- 
rents of every principle and of every 
objective; they turn against power this 
deterrence which is so well utilised for a long 
time itself. For, finally, it was capital which 
was the first to feed throughout its history 
on the destruction of every referential, of 
every human goal, which shattered every 
ideal distinction between true and false, good 
and evil, in order to establish a radical law of 
equivalence and exchange, the iron law of its 
power. It was the first to practice deterrence, 
abstraction, disconnection, deterritorialisa- 
tion, etc.; and if it was capital which fostered 
reality, the reality principle, it was also the 
first to liquidate it in the extermination of 
every use value, of every real equivalence, of 
production and wealth, in the very sensation 
we have of the unreality of the stakes and the 
omnipotence of manipulation. Now, it is this 
very logic which is today hardened even 
more against it. And when it wants to fight 
this catastrophic spiral by secreting one last 
glimmer of reality, on which to found one 



43 



Jean Baudrillard 

last glimmer of power, it only multiplies the 
signs and accelerates the play of simulation. 

As long as it was historically threatened 
by the real, power risked deterrence and 
simulation, disintegrating every contradic- 
tion by means of the production of 
equivalent signs. When it is threatened today 
by simulation (the threat of vanishing in the 
play of signs), power risks the real, risks 
crisis, it gambles on remanufacturing artifi- 
cial, social, economic, political stakes. This is 
a question of life or death for it. But it is too 
late. 

Whence the characteristic hysteria of 
our time: the hysteria of production and 
reproduction of the real. The other produc- 
tion, that of goods and commodities, that of 
la belle epoque of political economy, no longer 
makes any sense of its own, and has not for 
some time. What society seeks through 
production, and overproduction, is the 
restoration of the real which escapes it. That 
is why contemporary "material" production is itself 
hyperreal, It retains all the features, the whole 
discourse of traditional production, but it is 
nothing more than its scaled-down refraction 
(thus the hyperrealists fasten in a striking 



44 



The Precession of Simulacra 



resemblance a real from which has fled all 
meaning and charm, all the profundity and 
energy of representation). Thus the hyper- 
realism of simulation is expressed every- 
where by the real's striking resemblance to 

itself. 

Power, too, for some time now produces 
nothing but signs of its resemblance. And at 
the same time, another figure of power 
comes into play: that of a collective demand 
for signs of power — a holy union which forms 
around the disappearance of power. Every- 
body belongs to it more or less in fear of the 
collapse of the political. And in the end the 
game of power comes down to nothing more 
than the critical obsession with power— an 
obsession with its death, an obsession with 
its survival, the greater the more it 
disappears. When it has totally disappeared, 
logically we will be under the total spell of 
power — a haunting memory already fore- 
shadowed everywhere, manifesting at one 
and the same time the compulsion to get rid 
of it {nobody wants it any more, everbody 
unloads it on others) and the apprehensive 
pining over its loss. Melancholy for societies 
without power: this has already given rise to 



45 



Jean Baudrillard 



facism, that overdose of a powerful referen- 
tial in a society which cannot terminate its 
mourning. 

But we are still in the same boat: none of 
our societies knows how to manage its 
mourning for the real, for power, for the 
social itself, which is implicated in this same 
breakdown. And it is by an artificial 
revitalisation of all this that we try to escape 
it. Undoubtedly this will even end up in socialism. By 
an unforeseen twist of events and an irony 
which no longer belongs to history, it is 
through the death of the social that socialism 
will emerge — as it ts through the death of 
God that religions emerge. A twisted 
coming, a perverse event, an unintelligible 
reversion to the logic of reason. As is the fact 
that power is no longer present except to 
conceal that there is none. A simulation 
which can go on indefinitely, since — unlike 
"true" power which is, or was, a structure, a 
strategy, a relation of force, a stake — this is 
nothing but the object of a social demand, and 
hence subject to the law of supply and 
demand, rather than to violence and death. 
Completely expunged from the political 
dimension, it is dependent, like any other 



The Precession of Simulacra 

commodity, on production and mass con- 
sumption. Its spark has disappeared — only 
the fiction of a political universe is saved. 

Likewise with work. The spark of 
production, the violence of its stake no 
longer exists. Everybody still produces, and 
more and more, but work has subtly become 
something else: a need {as Marx ideally 
envisaged it, but not at all in the same sense), 
the object of a social "demand," like leisure, 
to which it is equivalent in the general run of 
life's options. A demand exactly proportional 
to the loss of stake in the work process. 6 
The samechangein fortune as for power: the 
scenario of work is there to conceal the fact 
that the work- real, the production-real, has 
disappeared. And for that matter so has the 
strike-real too, which is no longer a stoppage 
of work, but its alternative pole in the ritual 
scansion of the social calendar. It is as if 
everyone has "occupied" their work place or 
work post, after declaring the strike, and 
resumed production, as is the custom in a 
"self- man aged" job, in exactly the same 
terms as before, by declaring themselves 
(and virtually being) in a state of permanent 
strike. 



47 



Jean Baudrillard 

This isn't a science-fiction dream: 
everywhere it is a question of a doubling of 
the work process. And of a double or locum 
for the strike process — strikes which are 
incorporated like obsolescence in objects, like 
crisis in production. Then there is no longer 
any strikes or work, but both simultaneously, 
that is to say something else entirely: a 
wizardry of work, a trampe Yoeil, a scenodrama 
(not to say melodrama) of production, 
collective dramaturgy upon the empty stage 
of the social. 

1 1 is no longer a question of the ideology of 
work — of the traditional ethic that obscures 
the "real" labour process and the "objective" 
process of exploitation — but of the scenario 
of work. Likewise, it is no longer a question 
of the ideology of power, but of the seen ario of 
power. Ideology only corresponds to a 
betrayal of reality by signs; simulation 
corresponds to a short-circuit of reality and 
to its reduplication by signs. It is always the 
aim of ideological analysis to restore the 
objective process; it is always a false problem 
to want to restore the truth beneath the 
simulacrum. 

This is ultimately why power is so in 



48 



The Precession of Simulacra 



accord with ideological discourses and 
discourses on ideology, for these are all 
discourses of truth — always good, even and 
especially if they are revolutionary, to 
counter the mortal blows of simulation. 



The End of the Panopticon 
It is again to this ideology of the lived 
experience, of exhumation, of the real in its 
fundamental banality, in its radical authen- 
ticity, that the American TV-verite experi- 
ment on the Loud family in 1971 refers: 7 
months of uninterrupted shooting. 300 
hours of direct non-stop broadcasting, 
without script or scenario, the odyssey of a 
family, its dramas, its joys, ups and downs — 
in brief, a "raw" historical document, and the 
"best thing ever on television, comparable, at 
the level of our daily existence, to the film of 
the lunar landing." Things are complicated 
by the fact that this family came apart during 
the shooting: a crisis flared up, the Louds 
went their separate ways, etc. Whence that 
insoluble controversy: was TV responsible? 
What would have happened if TV hadn't been 
there. 



49 



Jean Baudrillard 

More interesting is the phantasm of 
filming the Louds as if TV wasn't there. The 
producer's trump card was to say: "They 
lived as if we weren't there". An absurd, 
paradoxical formula — neither true, nor false: 
but Utopian. The "as if we weren't there" is 
equivalent to "as if you were there". It is this 
Utopia, this paradox that fascinated 20 
million viewers, much more than the 
"perverse" pleasure of prying. In this "truth" 
experiment, it is neither a question of secrecy 
nor of perversion, but of a kind of thrill of the 
real, or of an aesthetics of the hyperreal, a 
thrill of vertiginous and phony exactitude, a 
thrill of alienation and of magnification, of 
distortion in scale, of excessive transparency 
all at the same time. The joy in an excess of 
meaning, when the bar of the sign slips 
below the regular water line of meaning: the 
non-signifier is elevated by the camera angle. 
Here the real can be seen to have never 
existed (but "as if you were there"), without 
the distance which produces perspective 
space and our depth vision (but "more true 
than nature"). Joy in the microscopic 
simulation which transforms the real into 
the hyperreal. (This is also a little like what 



50 



The Precession of Simulacra 

happens in porno, where fascination is more 
metaphysical than sexual.) 

This family was in any case already 
somewhat hyperrea! by its very selection: a 
typical, California- housed, 3 -garage, 5-chil- 
dren, well-to-do professional upper middle 
class ideal American family with an orna- 
mental housewife. In a way, it is .this 
statistical perfection which dooms it to 
death. This ideal heroine of the American 
way of life is chosen, as in sacrificial rites, to 
be glorified and to die under the fiery glare of 
the studio lights, a modern fatum. For the 
heavenly fire no longer strikes depraved 
cities, it is rather the lens which cuts through 
ordinary reality like a laser, putting it to 
death. "The Louds: simply a family who 
agreed to deliver themselves into the hands 
of television, and to die from it", said the 
producer. So it is really a question of a 
sacrificial process, of a sacrificial spectacle 
offered to 20 million Americans. The 
liturgical drama of a mass society. 

TV-verite. Admirable ambivalent terms: 
does it refer to the truth of this family, or to 
the truth of TV? In fact, it is TV which is the 
Loud's truth, it is it which is true, it is it 



51 



Jean Baudrillard 



which renders true. A truth which is no 
longer the reflexive truth of the mirror, nor 
the perspective truth of the panoptic system 
and of the gaze, but the manipulative truth 
of the test which probes and interrogates, of 
the laser which touches and then pierces, of 
computer cards which retain your punched- 
out sequences, of the genetic code which 
regulates your combinations, of cells which 
inform your sensory universe. It is to this 
kind of truth that the Loud family is 
subjected by the TV medium, and in this 
sense it really amounts to a death sentence 
(but is it still a question of truth?). 

The end of the panoptic system. The eye of TV 
is no longer the source of an absolute gaze, 
and the ideal of control is no longer that of 
transparency. The latter still presupposes an 
objective space (that of the Renaissance) and 
the omnipotence of a despotic gaze. This is 
still, if not a system of confinement, at least a 
system of scrutiny. No longer subtle, but 
always in a position of exteriority, playing on 
the opposition between seeing and being 
seen, even if the focal point of the panopticon 
may be blind. 

It is entirely different when with the 



52 



The Precession of Simulacra 



Louds "You no longer watch TV, TV 
watches you (live)," or again: "You no longer 
listen to Pas de Panique, Pas de Panique listens to 
you" — switching over from the panoptic 
apparatus of surveillance lof Discipline and 
Punish) to a system of deterrence, where the 
distinction between active and passive is 
abolished. No longer is there any imperative 
to submit to the model, or to the gaze. "YOU 
are the model!" "YOU are the majority!" 
Such is the slope of a hyperrealist sociality, 
where the real is confused with the model, as 
in the statistic operation, or with the 
medium, as in the Loud's operation. Such is 
the later stage of development of the social 
relation, our own, which is no longer one of 
persuasion (the classical age of propaganda, 
ideology, publicity, etc.) but one of dis- 
suasion or deterrence: "YOU are news, you 
are the social, the event is you, you are 
involved, you can use your voice, etc." A 
turnabout of affairs by which it becomes 
impossible to locate an instance of the model, 
of power, of the gaze, of the medium itself, 
since you are always already on the other 
side. No more subject, focal point, center or 
periphery: but pure flexion or circular 



53 



Jean Baudrillard 



inflection. No more violence or surveillance: 
only "information," secret virulence, chain 
reaction, slow implosion and simulacra of 
spaces where the real-effect again comes 
into play. 

We are witnessing the end of perspective 
and panoptic space {which remains a moral 
hypothesis bound up with every classical 
analysis of the "objective" essence of power), 
and hence the very abolition of the spectacular. 
Television, in the case of the Louds for 
example, is no longer a spectacular medium. 
We are no longer in the society of spectacle 
which the situationists talked about, nor in 
the specific types of alienation and repression 
which this implied. The medium itself is no 
longer identifiable as such, and the merging 
of the medium and the message (McLuhan 7 ) 
is the first great formula of this new age. 
There is no longer any medium in the literal 
sense: it is now intangible, diffuse and 
diffracted in the real, and it can no longer 
even be said that the latter is distorted by it. 

Such immixture, such a viral, endemic, 
chronic, alarming presence of the medium, 
without our being able to isolate its effects — 



54 



The Precession of Simulacra 



specialised, like those publicity holograms 
sculptured in empty space with laser beams, 
the event filtered by the medium — the 
dissolution of TV into life, the dissolution of 
life into TV — an indiscernible chemical 
solution: we are all Louds, doomed not to 
invasion, to pressure, to violence and to 
blackmail by the media and the models, but to 
their induction, to their infiltration, to their 
illegible violence. 

But we must be careful of the negative 
twist discourse gives this: it is a question 
neither of an illness nor of a viral complaint. 
Rather, we must think of the media as if they 
were, in outer orbit, a sort of genetic code 
which controls the mutation of the real into 
the hyperreal, just as the other, micromole- 
cular code controls the passage of the signal 
from a representative sphere of meaning to 
the genetic sphere of the programmed signal. 

The whole traditional mode of causality 
is brought into question: the perspective, 
deterministic mode, the "active," critical 
mode, the analytical mode — the distinction 
between cause and effect, between active 
and passive, between subject and object, 
between ends and means. It is in this mode 



55 



Jean Baudriliard 



that it can be said: TV watches us, TV 
alienates us, TV manipulates us, TV informs 
us . . . Throughout all this one is dependent 
on the analytical conception whose vanishing 
point is the horizon between reality and 
meaning. 

On the contrary, we must imagine TV 
on the DNA model, as an effect in which the 
opposing poles of determination vanish 
according to a nuclear contraction or 
retraction of the old polar schema which has 
always maintained a minimal distance 
between a cause and an effect, between the 
subject and an object: precisely, the meaning 
gap, the discrepancy, the difference, the 
smallest possible marginof error, irreductible 
under penalty of reabsorption in an aleatory 
and indeterminable process which discourse 
can no longer even account for, since it is 
itself a determinable order. 

It is this gap which vanishes in the 
genetic coding process, where indeterminacy 
is less a product of molecular randomness 
than a product of the abolition, pure and 
simple, of the relation. In the process of 
molecular control, which "goes" from the 
DNA nucleus tothe"substance"it"informs," 



56 



The Precession of Simulacra 



there is no more traversing of an effect, of an 
energy, of a determination, of any message. 
"Order, signal, impulse, message": all these 
attempt to render the matter intelligible to 
us, but by analogy, retranscribing in terms of 
inscription, vector, decoding, a dimension of 
which we know nothing — it is no longer 
even a "dimension," or perhaps it is the 
fourth (that which is defined, however, in 
Einsteinian relativity, by the absorption of 
the distinct poles of space and time). In fact, 
this whole process only makes sense to us in 
the negative form. But nothing separates 
one pole from the other, the initial from the 
terminal: there is just a sort of contraction 
into each other, a fantastic telescoping, a 
collapsing of the two traditional poles into 
one another an IMPLOSION — an absorption 
of the radiating model of causality, of the 
differential mode of determination, with its 
positive and negative electricity — an implo- 
sion of meaning. This is where simulation begins. 
Everywhere, in whatever political, bio- 
logical, psychological, media domain, where 
the distinction between poles can no longer 
be maintained, one enters into simulation, 
and hence into absolute manipulation — not 



57 



Jean Baudrillard 



passivity, but the non-distinction of active and 
passive. DNA realises this aleatory reduction 
at the level of the living substance. 
Television itself, in the example of the Louds, 
also attains this indefinite limit where the 
family vis-a-vis TV are no more or less active 
or passive than is a living substance vis-a-vis 
its molecular code. In both there is only a 
nebula indecipherable into its simple ele- 
ments, indecipherable as to its truth. 

Orbital and Nuclear 
The nuclear is the apotheosis of 
simulation. Yet the balance of terror is 
nothing more than the spectacular slope of a 
system of deterrence that has crept from the 
inside into all the cracks of daily life. The 
nuclear cliff-hanger only seals the trivialised 
system of deterrence at the heart of the 
media, of the inconsequential violence that 
reigns throughout the world, of the aleatory 
contrivance of every choice which is made 
for us. The slightest details of our behaviour 
are ruled by neutralised, indifferent, equi- 
valent signs, by zero-sum signs like those 
which regulate "game strategy" (but the 
genuine equation is elsewhere, and the 



58 



The Precession of Simulacra 

unknown is precisely that variable of 
simulation which makes the atomic arsenal 
itself a hyperreal form, a simulacrum which 
dominates us all and reduces all "ground- 
level" events to mere ephemeral scenarios, 
transforming the only life left to us into 
survival, into a wager without takers — not 
even into a death policy: but into a policy 
devaluated in advance). 

Ft isn't that the direct menace of atomic 
destruction paralyses our lives. It is rather 
that deterrence leukemises us. And this 
deterrence come from the very situation 
which excludes the real atomic clash — excludes it 
beforehand like the eventuality of the real in 
a system of signs. Everybody pretends to 
believe in the reality of this menace (one 
understands it from the military point of 
view, the whole seriousness of their exercise, 
and the discourse of their "strategy," is at 
stake): but there are precisely no strategic 
stakes at this level, and the whole originality 
of the situation lies in the improbability of 
destruction. 

Deterrence excludes war — the anti- 
quated violence of expanding systems. 
Deterrence is the neutral, implosive violence 



59 



Jean Baudrillard 

of metastable or involving systems. There is 
no subject of deterrence any more, nor 
adversary, nor strategy — it is a planetary 
structure of the annihilation of stakes. 
Atomic war, like that of Troy, will not take 
place. The risk of nuclear atomisation only 
serves as a pretext, through the sophistication 
of arms — but this sophistication exceeds any 
possible objective to such an extent that it is 
itself a symptom of nonexistence — to the 
installation of a universal system of security, 
linkup, and control whose deterrent effect 
does not aim for atomic clash at all (the latter 
has never been a real possibility, except no 
doubt right at the beginning of the cold war, 
when the nuclear posture was confused with 
conventional war) but really the much larger 
probability of any real event, of anything 
which could disturb the general system and 
upset the balance. The balance of terror is 
the terror of balance. 

Deterrence is not a strategy. It circulates 
and is exchanged between the nuclear 
protagonists exactly like international capital 
in that orbital zone of monetary speculation, 
whose flow is sufficient to control all global 
finance. Thus kill money (not referring to real 



60 



The Precession of Simulacra 



killing, any more than floating capital refers 
to real production) circulating in nuclear 
orbit is sufficient to control all violence and 
potential conflict on the globe. 

What stirs in the shadow of this posture, 
under the pretext of a maximal "objective" 
menace, and thanks to that nuclear sword of 
Damocles, is the perfection of the best 
system of control which has never existed. 
And the progressive satellisation of the 
whole planet by that hypermodel of security. 

The same goes for peaceful nuclear 
installations. Pacification doesn't distinguish 
between the civil and the military: wherever 
irreversible apparatuses of control are 
elaborated, wherever the notion of security 
becomes absolute, wherever the norm of 
security replaces the former arsenal of laws 
and violence (including war), the system of 
deterrence grows, and around it grows an 
historical, social and political desert. A huge 
involution makes every conflict, every 
opposition, every act of defiance contract in 
proportion to this blackmail which inter- 
rupts, neutralises and freezes them. No 
mutiny, no history can unfurl any more 
according to its own logic since it risks 



61 



Jean Baudrillard 



annihilation. No strategy is even possible any 
more, and escalation is only a puerile game 
left to the military. The political stake is dead. 
Only simulacra of conflict and carefully 
circumscribed stakes remain. 

The "space race" played exactly the same 
role as the nuclear race. This is why it was so 
easily able to take over from it in the '60's 
(Kennedy/Khrushchev), or to develop con- 
currently ina mode of "peaceful coexistence." 
For what is the ultimate function of the space 
race, of lunar conquest, of satellite launch- 
ings, if not the institution of a model of 
universal gravitation, of satellisation, whose 
perfect embryo is the lunar module: a 
programmed microcosm, where nothing can be 
leftiochancel Trajectory, energy, computation, 
physiology, psychology, the environment — 
nothing can be left to contingency, this is the 
total universe of the norm— the Law no 
longer exists, it is the operational immanence 
of every detail which is law. A universe 
purged of every threat to the senses, in a 
state of asepsis and weightlessness — it is this 
very perfection which is fascinating. For the 
exaltation of the masses was not in response 
to the lunar landing or the voyage of man in 



62 



The Precession of Simulacra 

space (this is rather the fulfillment of an 
earlier dream) — no, we are dumbfounded by 
the perfection of their planning and technical 
manipulation, by the immanent wonder of 
programmed development. Fascinated by the 
maximisation of norms and by the mastery 
of probability. Unbalanced by the model, as 
we are by death, but without fear or impulse. 
For if the law, with its aura of transgression, 
if order, with its aura of violence, still taps a 
perverse imaginary, then the norm fixes, 
hypnotises, dumbfounds, causing every 
imaginary to involve. We no longer fantasise 
about every minutia of a program. Its 
observance alone unbalances. The vertigo of 
a flawless world. 

The same model of planned infallibility, 
of maximal security and deterrence, now 
governs the spread of the social. That is the 
true nuclearfallout: the meticulous opera Hon 
of technology serves as a model for the 
meticulous operation of the social. Here, too, 
nothing will be left to chance; moreover, this is the 
essence of socialisation, which has been 
going on for some centuries but which has 
now entered into its accelerated phase, 
towards a limit people imagined would be 



63 



Jean BaudriUard 

explosive (revolution), but which currently 
results in an inverse, irreversible, implosive 
process: a generalised deterrence of every 
chance, of every accident, of every trans- 
versality, of every finality, of every contra- 
diction, rupture or complexity in a sociality 
illuminated by the norm and doomed to the 
transparency of detail radiated by data- 
collecting mechanisms. In fact, the spatial and 
nuclear models do not even have their own 
ends: neither has lunar exploration, nor 
military and strategic superiority. Their 
truth lies in their being models of simulation, 
vector models of a system of planetary 
control (where even the super-powers of this 
scenario are not free — the whole world is 
satellised). 8 

Reject the evidence: with satellistation, 
the one who is satellised is not whom you 
might think. By the orbital inscription of a 
space object, the planet earth becomes a 
satellite, the terrestrial principle of reality 
becomes excentric, hyperreal and insignifi- 
cant. By the orbital establishment of a 
system of control like peaceful coexistence, 
all terrestrial microsystems are satellised 
and lose their autonomy. AH energy, all 



64 



The Precession of Simulacra 



events are absorbed by this excentric 
gravitation, everything condenses and im- 
plodes on the micro-model of control alone 
(the orbital satellite), as conversely, in the 
other, biological dimension everything con- 
verges and implodes on the molecular micro- 
model of the genetic code. Between the two, 
caught between the nuclear and the genetic, 
in the simultaneous assumption of the two 
fundamental codes of deterrence, every 
principle of meaning is absorbed, every 
deployment of the real is impossible. 

The simultaneity of two events in July 
1975 illustrates this in a striking way: the 
linkup in space of the two American and 
Soviet super-satellites, apotheosis of peaceful 
existence — and the suppression by the 
Chinese of character writing and conversion 
to the Roman alphabet. This latter signifies 
the "orbital" establishment of an abstract 
and model system of signs, into whose orbit 
will be reabsorbed all those once remarkable 
and singular forms of style and writing. The 
satellisation of their tongue; this is the way 
the Chinese enter the system of peaceful 
coexistence, which is inscribed in their sky at 



65 



Jean Baudrillard 



the very same time by the docking of the two 
satellites. The orbital flight of the Big Two, 
the neutralisation and homogenisation of 
everybody else on earth. 

Yet, despite this deterrence by the 
orbital authority — the nuclear code or 
molecular — events continue at ground level, 
mishaps are increasingly more numerous, 
despite the global process of contiguity and 
simultaneity of data. But, subtly, these 
events no longer make any sense; they are 
nothing more than a duplex effect of 
simulation at the summit. The best example 
must be the Vietnam war, since it was at the 
crossroads of a maximal historical or 
"revolutionary" stake and the installation of 
this deterrent authority. What sense did that 
war make, if not that its unfolding sealed the 
end of history in the culminating and decisive 
event of our age? 

Why did such a difficult, long and 
arduous war vanish overnight as if by magic? 

Why didn't the American defeat (the 
greatest reversal in its history) have any 
internal repercussions? If it had truly 
signified a setback in the planetary strategy 



66 



The Precession of Simulacra 

of the USA, it should have necessarily 
disturbed the internal balance of the 
American political system. But no such thing 
happened. 

Hence something else took place. Ulti- 
mately this war was only a crucial episode in 
a peaceful coexistence. It marked the advent 
of China to peaceful coexistence. The long 
sought-after securing and concretising of 
China's non-intervention, China's appren- 
ticeship in a global modus vivendi, the passing 
from a strategy of world revolution to one of 
a sharing of forces and empires, the 
transition from a radical alternative to 
political alternation in a now almost settled 
system (normalisation of Peking-Washington 
relations): all this was the stake of the 
Vietnam war, and in that sense, the USA 
pulled out of Vietnam but they won the war. 

And the war"spontaneously"came toan 
end when the objective had been attained. 
This is why it was de-escalated, demobilised 
so easily. 

The effects of this same remolding are 
legible in the field. The war lasted as long as 
there remained unliquidated elements ir- 
reducible to a healthy politics and a discipline 



67 



lean Baudrillard 

of power, even a communist one. When 
finally the war passed from the rersistance to 
the hands of regular Northern troops, it 
could stop: it had attained its objective. Thus 
the stake was a political relay. When the 
Vietnamese proved they were no longer 
bearers of an unpredictable subversion, it 
could be handed over to them. That this was 
communist order wasn't fundamentally 
serious: it had proved itself, it could be 
trusted. They are even more effective than 
capitalists in liquidating "primitive" pre- 
capitalist and antiquated structures. 

Same scenario as in the Algerian war. 

The other aspect of this war and of all 
wars since: behind the armed violence, the 
murderous antagonism between adversaries — 
which seems a matter of life and death, and 
which is played as such (otherwise you could 
never send out people to get smashed up in 
this kind of trouble), behind this simulacrum 
of a struggle to death and of ruthless global 
stakes, the two adversaries are fundamentally 
as one against that other, unnamed, never 
mentioned thing, whose objective outcome 
in war, with equal complicity between the 
two adversaries, is total liquidation. It is 



68 



The Precession of Simulacra 

tribal, communal, pre-capitalist structures, 
every form of exchange, language and 
symbolic organisation which must be abol- 
ished. Their murder is the object of war — 
and in its immense spectacular contrivance 
of death, war is only the medium of this 
process of terrorist rationalisation by the 
social — the murder through which sociality 
can be founded, no matter what allegiance, 
communist or capitalist. The total complicity 
or division of labour between twoadversaries 
(who can even make huge sacrifices to reach 
that) for the very purpose of remolding and 
domesticating social relations. 

"The North Vietnamese were advised to 
countenance a scenario of the liquidation of 
the American presence through which, of 
course, honour must be preserved." 

The scenario: the extremely heavy 
bombardment of Hanoi- The intolerable 
nature of this bombing should not conceal 
the fact that it was only a simulacrum to 
allow the Vietnamese to seem tocountenance 
a compromise and Nixon to make the 
Americans swallow the retreat of their 
forces. The game was already won, nothing 
was objectively at stake but the credibility of 



69 



Jean Baudrillard 



the final montage. 

Moralists about war, champions of war's 
exalted values should not be greatly upset: a 
war is not any the less heinous for being a 
mere simulacrum — the flesh suffers just the 
same, and the dead ex-combatants count as 
much there as in other wars. That objective 
is always amply accomplished, like that of the 
partitioning of territories and of disciplinary 
sociality. What no longer exists is the 
adversity of adversaries, the reality of 
antagonistic causes, the ideological serious- 
ness of war — also the reality of defeat or 
victory, war being a process whose triumph 
lies quite-beyond these appearances. 

In any case, the pacification {or deter- 
rence) dominating us today is beyond war 
and peace, the simultaneous equivalence of 
peace and war. "War is peace," said Orwell. 
Here, also, the two differential poles implode 
into each other, or recycle one another — a 
simultaneity of contradictions that is both 
the parody and the end of all dialectic. Thus it 
is possible to miss the truth of a war: namely, 
that it was well over before reaching a 
conclusion, that at its very core, war was 



70 



The Precession of Simulacra 



brought to an end, and that perhaps it never 
ever began. Many other such events (the oil 
crisis, etc.) never began, never existed, except 
that artificial mishaps — abstracts, ersatzesof 
troubles, catastrophes and crises intended to 
maintain a historical and psychological 
investment under hypnosis. All media and 
the official news service only exist to 
maintain the illusion of actuality— of the 
reality of the stakes, of the objectivity of the 
facts. All events are to be read in reverse, 
where one perceives(as with the communists 
"in power" in Italy, the posthumous, 
"nostalgic" rediscovery of gulags and Soviet 
dissidents tike the almost contemporary 
rediscovery, by a moribund ethnology, of the 
lost "difference" of Savages) that all these 
things arrive too late, with an overdue 
history, a lagging spiral, that they have 
exhausted their meaning long in advance and 
only survive on an artificial effervescence of 
signs, that all these events follow on 
illogically from one another, with a total 
equanimity towards the greatest inconsisten- 
cies, with a profound indifference to their 
consequences (but this is because there are 
none any more: they burn out in their 



71 



Jean Baudrillard 



spectacular promotion) — thus the whole 
newsreel of "the present" gives the sinister 
impression of kitsch, retro and porno all at 
the same time — doubtless everyone knows 
this, and nobody really accepts it. The reality 
of simulation is unendurable — more cruel 
than Artaud's Theatre of Cruelty, which was 
still an attempt at a dramaturgy of life, the 
last flickering of an ideal of the body, blood 
and violence in a system already sweeping 
towards a reabsorption of all the stakes 
without a trace of blood. For us the trick has 
been played. All dramaturgy, and even all 
real writing of cruelty has disappeared. 
Simulation is master, and nostalgia, the 
phantasmal parodic rehabilitation of all lost 
referentials, alone remain. Everything still 
unfolds before us, in the cold light of 
deterrence (including Artaud, who is entitled 
like all the rest to his revival, to a second 
existence as the referential of cruelty). 

This is why nuclear proliferation in- 
creases neither the chance of atomic clash 
nor of accident — save in the interval where 
"young" powers could be tempted to use 
them for non-deterrent or "real" purposes 
(like the Americans did on Hiroshima— but 



72 



The Precession of Simulacra 

precisely they alone were entitled to this "use 
value" of the bomb, while al! those who have 
since acquired it are deterred from using it by 
the very fact of its possession). Entry into the 
atomic club, so amusingly named, very 
rapidly removes (like syndicalisation for the 
working world) any inclination towards 
violent intervention. Responsibility, control, 
censorship, self-deterrence always increases 
faster than the forces or weapons at our 
disposal: this is the secret of the social order. 
Thus the very possibility of paralysing a 
whole country with the flick of a switch makes 
it impossible that electrical engineers will 
ever utilise this weapon: the entire myth of 
the revolutionary and total strike collapses at 
the very moment when the means to so are 
available — but alas, exactly because the means 
to do so are available. This is deterrence in a 
nutshell. 

Therefore it is altogether likely that one 
day we shall see the nuclear powers 
exporting atomic reactors, weapons and 
bombs to every latitude. After control by 
threat will succeed the much more effective 
strategy of pacification by the bomb and by 
its possession. "Small" powers, hoping tobuy 



73 



Jean Baudrillard 



their independent strike force, will only buy 
the virus of deterrence, of their own 
deterrence. The same goes for the atomic 
reactors we have already sent them: so many 
neutron bombs knocking out all historical 
virulence, all risk of explosion. In this sense, 
the nuclear system institutes a universally 
accelerated process of implosion, it conceals 
everything around it, it absorbs all living 
energy. 

The nuclear system is both the culminat- 
ing point of available energy and the 
maximisation of systems controlling all 
energy- Lockdown and control grow as fast 
as (and undoubtedly even faster than) 
liberating potentialities. This was already the 
aporia of modern revolutions. It is still the 
absolute paradox of the nuclear system. 
Energies freeze by their own fire power, they 
deter themselves. One can't really see what 
project, what power, what strategy, what 
subject could possibly be behind this 
enclosure, this vast saturation of a system by 
its own hereafter neutralised, unusable, 
unintelligible, non-explosive forces — except 
the possibility of an explosion towards the center, 
or an implosion where all these energies are 



74 



The Precession of Simulacra 



abolished in a catastrophic process (in the 
literal sense, that is to say in the sense of a 
reversion of the whole cycle towards a 
minimal point, of a reversion of energies 
towards a minimal threshold). 



Translated by Paul Fobs 
and Paul Patton 



Notes 

1. Cf. ]. Baudrillard, Lechange symbohque et la mart, 
("L'ordre des simulacres"), Paris, Gallimard, 1975. 

2. And which is not susceptible to resolution in 
transference. It is the entanglement of these two 
discourses which makes psychoanalysis interminable. 

3. Cf. M. Perniola, "lcones. Visions, Simulacres," 
Traverses/ 10, p, 39. 

4. This does not necessarily result in a despair of 
meaning, but just as much in an improvisation of 
meaning, of nonsense, or of several simultaneous 
senses which cancel each other out. 

5. The energy crisis, the ecological setting, by and 
large, are themselves a disaster film, in the same style 
(and of the same value) as those which currently do so 
well for Hollywood. It is pointless to laboriously 
interpret these films by their relationship with an 



75 



Jean Baudriilard 



"objective* social crisis, or even with an "objective" 
phantasm of disaster It is in the other direction that 
we must say it is I he social itself whtch, in contemporary 
discourse, is organised according to a script for a disaster film. 
(Cf. Makarius, "La strategie de la catastrophe," 
Traverses/ 10, p. 15. 

6. To this flagging investment in work corre- 
sponds a parallel declininginvestmentinconsumption. 
Goodbye to use value or prestige of the automobile, 
goodbye to t he a morou s discou rs e wh ich mad e a clea r- 
cut distinction between the object of enjoyment and 
the object of work. Another discourse takes over, 
which is a discourse of work on the object of consumption 
aiming at an active, compelling, puritan reinvestment 
(use less gas, look to your security , speed is obsolete, 
etc.), to which automobile specifications pretend to be 
adapted: rediscovering a stake by transposition of the 
poles , Thus wor k becomes t he object o f a need, t he car 
becomes the object of work— no better proof of the 
inability to distinguish the stakes. It is by the very 
swing of voting "rights" to electoral "duties" that the 
disinvestment of the political sphere is signaled. 

7. The medium/ message confusion, of course, is a 
correlative of the confusion between sender and 
receiver, thus sealing the disappearance of all the dual, 
polar structures which formed the discursive 
organisation of language, referring to the celebrated 
grid of functions in Jacobson, the organisation of alt 
determinate articulation of meaning. "Circular" 
discourse must be taken literally: that is, it no longer 
goes from one point to the other but describes a circle 



76 



The Precession of Simulacra 



that indistinctly incorporates the positions of transmit- 
ter and receiver, henceforth unbeatable as such. Thus 
there is no longer any instance of power, any 
transmitting authority — power is something that 
circulates and whosesourcecan no longer be located, a 
cycle in which the positions of dominator and the 
dominated interchange in an endless reversion which 
is also the end of power in its classical definition. The 
circularisation of power, knowledge and discourse 
brings every localisation of instances and poles to an 
end. Even in psychoanalytic interpretation, the 
"power" of the interpreter does not come from any 
external authority, but from the interpreted them- 
selves. This changes everything, for we can always 
ask the traditional holders of power where they get 
their power from. Who made you Duke? The King 
And who made the King? God. God alone does not 
reply. But to the question: who made the psycho- 
analyst? the analyst quite easily replies: You. Thus is 
expressed, by an inverse simulation, the passage from 
the "analysed" to the "analysand," from active to 
passive, which only goes to describe the swirling, 
mobile effect of the poles, its effect of circularity in 
which power is lost, is dissolved, is resolved into 
complete manipulation (this is no longer of the order 
of the directive authority and the gaze, but of the 
order of personal contact and commutation). See, also, 
the State/ family circularity secured by the floating 
and metastatic regulation of images of the social and 
the private. (J. Donzelot, The Policing of Families) 

From now on, it is impossible to ask the famous 



77 



Jean Baudrillard 



question. 

"From what position do you speak?" — 

"How do you know?" — 

"From where do you get the power?", without 
immediately getting the reply: "But it is of (from) you 
that 1 speak" — meaning, it is you who speaks, is is you 
who knows, power is you, A gigantic circonvolution, 
circumlocution of the spoken word, which amounts to 
irredeemable blackmail and irremovable deterrence of 
the subject supposed to speak, but left without a word 
to say, responseless. since to questions asked can come 
the inevitable reply: but you art the reply, on your 
question is already an answer, etc. — the whole 
sophistical stranglehold of word-tapping, forced 
confession disguised as free expression, trapping the 
subject in his own questioning, the precession of the 
reply about the question {the whole violence of 
interpretation is there, and the violence of the 
conscious or unconscious self-management of "speech) 
This simulacrum of inversion or involution of poles, 
this clever subterfuge which is the secret of the whole 
discourse of manipulation and hence, today, in every 
domain, the secret of all those new powers sweeping 
clean the stage of power, forging the assumption of all 
speech from which comes that fantastic silent 
majority characteristic of our times — all this un- 
doubtedly began in the political sphere with the 
democratic simulacrum, that is to say with the 
substitution of the instance of the people for the 
instance of God as source of power, and the 
substitution of power as rrpresentatwn for power as 



78 



The Precession of Simulacra 



emanation. An anti-Copernican revolution: no longer 
any transcendent instance nor any sun nor any 
luminous source of power and knowledge— every- 
thing comes from and returns to the people. It is this 
magnificent recycling that the universal simulacrum of 
manipulation, from the scenario of mass suffrage to 
present-day and ilusory opinion polls, begins to be 
installed. 

8. Paradox: all bombs are clean— their only 
pollution is the system of control and security they 
radiate whtn thty art not detonattd. 



79 



The Orders of Simulacra 



Three orders of appearance, parallel to 
the mutations of the law of value, have 
followed one another since the Renaissance: 

— Counterfeit is the dominant scheme of 
the "classical" period, from the Renaissance 
to the industrial revolution; 

— Production is the dominant scheme of 
the industrial era; 

— Simulation is the reigning scheme of 
the current phase that is controlled by the 
code. 

The first order of simulacrum is based 
on the natural law of value, that of the 
second order on the commercial law of value, 
that of the third order on the structural law 
of value. 

The Stucco Angel 

Counterfeit (and fashion at the same 
time) is born with the Renaissance, with the 



a3 



Jean Baudrillard 

destructuring of the feudal order by the 
bourgeois order and the emergence of open 
competition on the level of the distinctive 
signs. There is no such thing as fashion in a 
society of cast and rank, since one is assigned 
a place irrevocably, and so class mobility is 
non-existent. An interdiction protects the 
signs and assures them a total clarity; each 
each sign then refers unequivocally to a status. 
Likewise no counterfeit is possible with the 
ceremony — unless as black magic and sacri- 
lege, and it is thus that any confusion of 
signs is punished: as grave infraction of the 
order of things. If we are starting to dream 
again, today especially, of a world of sure 
signs, of a strong "symbolic order," make no 
mistake about it; this order has existed and it 
was that of a ferocious hierarchy, since 
transparency and cruelty for signs go 
together. In caste societies, feudal or archaic, 
cruel societies, the signs are limited in number, 
and are not widely diffused, each one 
functions with its full value as interdiction, 
each is a reciprocal obligation between 
castes, clans or persons. The signs therefore 
are anything but arbitrary. The arbitrary 
sign begins when, instead of linking two 



84 



The Orders of Simulacra 



persons in an unbreakable reciprocity, the 
signifier starts referring back to the dis- 
enchanted universe of the signified, common 
denominator of the real world toward which 
no one has any obligation. 

End of the obliged sign, reign of the 
emancipated sign, that ail classes will partake 
equally of. Competitive democracy succeeds 
the endogomy of signs proper to statutory 
order- At the same time we pass, with the 
transfer of values/ signs of prestige from one 
class to another, necessarily into counterfeit. 
For we have passed from a limited order of 
signs, which prohibits "free production," to a 
proliferation of signs according to demand. 
But the sign multiplied no longer resembles 
in the slightest the obliged sign of limited 
diffusion: it is its counterfeit, not by 
corruption of an "original", but by extension 
of a material whose very clarity depended on 
the restriction by which it was bound. No 
longer discriminating (if is no more than 
competitive), unburdened of all restraint, 
universally available, the modern sign still 
simulates necessity in taking itself as tied 
somehow to the world. The modern sign 
dreams of the signs of the past and would 



85 



Jean BaudriUard 

well appreciate finding again, in its reference 
to the real, an obligation: but what it finds 
again is only a reason: this referential reason, 
this real, this "natural" off which it is going 
to live. But this bond of designation is only 
the simulacrum of symbolic obligation: it 
produces neutral values only, that can be 
exchanged in an objective world. The sign 
here suffers the same destiny as work. The 
"free" worker is free only to produce 
equivalents— the "free and emancipated" 
sign is free only to produce the signs of 
equivalence. 

It is therefore in the simulacrum of a 
"nature" that the modern sign finds its 
value. Problematic of the "natural/' meta- 
physics of reality and appearance: that is the 
history of the bourgeoisie since the Renais- 
sance, mirror of the bourgeois sign, mirror 
of the classical sign. And still today the 
nostalgia for a natural referent of the sign is 
still alive, in spite of the revolutions that 
have come to break up this configuration, 
including one in production, where the signs 
refer no longer to any nature, but only to the 
law of exchange, and come under the 
commercial law of value. 



86 



The Orders of Simulacra 



It is in the Renaissance that the false is 
born along with the natural. From the fake 
shirt in front to the use of the fork as 
artificial prosthesis, to the stucco interiors 
and the great baroque theatrical machinery. 
The entire classical era belongs par excellence to 
the theatre. Theatre is the form which takes 
over social life and all of architecture from 
the Renaissance on. It's there, in the 
prowesses of stucco and baroque art, that 
you read the methapysic of the counterfeit 
and the new ambitions of Renaissance 
man — those of a worldly demiurge, a transub- 
stantiation of all of nature into a unique 
substance, theatrical like social life unified 
under the sign of bourgeois values, beyond 
all differences in blood, rank, or of caste. 
Stucco means democracy triumphant over 
all artificial signs, the apotheosis of theatre 
and fashion, and it betrays the new classes' 
infinite capabilities, its power to do anything 
once it has been able to break through the 
exclusiveness of signs. The way lies open to 
unheard-of combinations, to all the games, 
all the counterfeits — the Promethean verve 
of the bourgeoisie first plunged into the 
imitation of nature before throwing itself into 



87 



Jean Baudrillard 



production. In the churches and palaces stucco 
ts wed to all forms, imitates everything — 
velvet curtains, wooden corniches, charnel 
swelling of the flesh. Stucco exorcizes the 
unlikely confusion of matter into a single 
new substance, a sort of general equivalent 
of all the others, and isprestigious theatrical 
ly because is itself a representative sub- 
stance, a mirror of all the others. 

But simulacra are not only a game 
played with signs; they imply social rapports 
and social power. Stucco can come off as the 
exhaltation of a rising science and technolo- 
gy; it is also connected to the baroque — 
which in turn is tied to the enterprise of the 
Counter Reformation and the hegemony 
over the political and mental world that the 
Jesuits — who were the first to act according 
to modern conceptions of power — attempted 
to establish. 

There is a strict correlation between the 
mental obedience of the Jesuits {"perinde ac 
cadaver") and the demiurgic ambition to 
exorcize the natural substance of a thing in 
order to substitute a synthetic one. Just likea 
man submitting his will to his organization, 
things take on the ideal functionality of the 



88 



The Orders of Simulacra 



cadaver. All technology, all technocracy are 
incipiently there: the presumption of an ideal 
counterfeit of the world, expressed in the 
invention of a universal substance and of a 
universal amalgam of substances. Reunify 
the scattered world (after the Reformation) 
under the aegis of a homogenous doctrine, 
universalize the world under a single word 
(from New Spain to Japan: the Missions), 
constitute a political elite of the >tate. with an 
identically centralized strategy: these are the 
objectives of the Jesuits. In order to accom- 
plish this, you need to create effective 
simulacra: the apparatus of the organization 
is one, but also is clerkly magnificence and 
the theatre (the great theatre of the 
cardinals and grey eminences). And training 
and education are other simulacra that 
aimed, for the first time ever in a systematic 
manner, at remodeling an ideal nature from 
a child, That architectural sauce of stucco 
and baroque is a great apparatus of the same 
kind. All of the above precedes the produc- 
tivist rationality of capital, but everything 
testifies already — not in production, but in 
counterfeit to the same project of control 
and universal hegemony — to a social scheme 



89 



Jean Baudrillard 

where the internal coherence of a system is 
already at work. 

Once there lived in the Ardennes an old 
cook, to whom the molding of buildings out 
of cakes and the science of plastic patisserie 
had given the ambition to take up the 
creation of the world where God had left it, 
in its natural phase, so as to eliminate its 
organic spontaneity and substitute for it a 
single, unique and polymorphous matter: 
Reinforced Concrete: concrete furniture, 
chairs, drawers, concrete sewing machines, 
and outside in the courtyard, an entire 
orchestra, including violins, of concrete — all 
concrete! Concrete trees with real leaves 
printed into them, a hog made out of 
reinforced concrete, but with a real hog's 
skull inside, concrete sheep covered with real 
wool. Camille Renault had finally found the 
original substance, the paste from which 
different things can only be distinguished by 
"realistic" nuance: the hog's skull, leaves of 
the tree — but this was doubtless only a 
concession of the demiurge to his visitors . . , 
for it was with an adorable smile that this 80- 
year-old god received visitors to his creation. 
He sought no argument with divine creation; 



90 



The Orders of Simulacra 

he was remaking it only to render it more 
intelligible. Nothing here of a Luriferan 
revolt, or a will-to-parody, or of a desire to 
espouse the cause of naive art. The Ardennes 
cook reigned simply over a unified mental 
substance (for concrete is a menial substance; 
it allows, just like a concept, phenomena to 
be organized and divided up at will). His 
project was not so far from that of the 
builders in stucco of baroque art, nor very 
different from the projection on the terrain 
of an urban community in the current great 
ensembles. The counterfeit is working, so 
far, only on substance and form, not yet on 
relations and structures. But it is aiming 
already, on this level, at the control of a 
pacified society, ground up into a synthetic, 
deathless substance: an indestructible arti- 
fact that will guarantee an eternity of power. 
Is it not man's miracle to have invented, with 
plastic, a non-degradabte material, interrupt- 
ing thus the cycle which, by corruption and 
death, turns all the earth's substances 
ceaselessly one into another? A substance 
out-of-the-cycle; even fire leaves an inde- 
structible residue. There is something in- 
credible about it, this simulacrum where you 



91 



Jean Baudrillard 



can see in a condensed form the ambition of a 
universal semiotic- This has nothing to do 
with the "progress" of technology or with a 
rational goal for science. It is a project of 
political and cultural hegemony, the fantasy 
of a closed mental substance— like those 
angels of baroque stucco whose extremities 
meet in a curved mirror. 



The Automation of the Robot 

A whole world separates these two 
artificial beings. One is a theatrical counter- 
feit, a mechanical and clock-like man; 
technique submits entirely to analogy and to 
the effect of semblance. The other is 
dominated by the technical principle; the 
machine overrides all. and with the machine 
equivalence comes too. The automaton plays 
the part of courtier and good company; it 
participates in the pre-Revolutionary French 
theatrical and social games. The robot, on 
the other hand, as his name indicates, is a 
worker: the theatre is over and done with, 
the reign of mechanical man commences. 
The automaton is the analogy of man and 



92 



The Orders of Simulacra 

remains his interlocutor (they play chess 
together!). The machine is man's equivalent 
and annexes him to itself in the unity of its 
operational process. This is the difference 
between a simulacrum of the first order and 
one of the second. 

We shouldn't make any mistakes on this 
matter for reasons of "figurative" resemblance 
between robot and automaton. The latter is 
an interrogation upon nature, the mystery 
of the existence or non-existence of the soul, 
the dilemma of appearance and being. It is 
like God: what's underneath it all, what's 
inside, what's in the back of it? Only the 
counterfeit men allow these problems to be 
posed. The entire metaphysics of man as 
protagonist of the natural theatre of the 
creation is incarnated in the automaton, 
before disappearing with the Revolution. 
And the automaton has no other destiny 
than to be ceaselessly compared to living 
man— so as to be more natural than him, of 
which he is the ideal figure. A perfect double 
for man, right up to the suppleness of his 
movements, the functioning of his organs 
and intelligence — right up to touching upon 
the anguish there would be in becoming 



93 



Jean Baudrillani 



aware that there is no difference, that the 
soul is over with and now it is an ideally 
naturalized body which absorbs its energy. 
Sacrilege. This difference is then always 
maintained, as in the case of that perfect 
automaton that the impersonator's jerky 
movements on stage imitate; so that at least, 
even if the roles were reversed, no confusion 
would be possible. In this way the inter- 
rogation of the automaton remains an open 
one, which makes it out to be a kind of 
mechanical optimist, even if the counterfeit 
always connotes something diabolical. * 

No such thing with the/obot. The robot 
no longer interrogates appearance; its only 
truth is in its mechanical efficacy. It is no 
longer turned towards a resemblance with 
man, to whom furthermore it no longer 
bears comparison. That infinitesimal meta- 
physical difference, which made all the 
charm and mystery of the automaton, no 
longer exists; the robot has absorbed it for its 
own benefit. Being and appearance are 
melted into a common substance of produc- 
tion and work. The first-order simulacrum 
never abolished difference. It supposes an 
always detectable alteration between sem- 



94 



The Orders of Simulacra 



blance and reality (a particularly subtle game 
with trompe-l'oeil painting, but art lives 
entirely off of this gap). The second-order 
simulacrum simplifies the problem by the 
absorption of the appearances, or by the 
liquidation of the real, whichever. It estab- 
lishes in any case a reality, image, echo, 
appearance; such is certainly work, the 
machine, the system of industrial production 
in its entirety, in that it is radically opposed 
to the principle of theatrical illusion. No 
more resemblance or lack of resemblance, of 
God, or human being, but an imminent logic 
of the operational principle. 

From then on, men and machines can 
proliferate. It is even their law to do so — 
which the automatons never have done, 
being instead sublime and singular mecha- 
nisms. Men themselves only started their 
own proliferation when they achieved the 
status of machines, with the industrial 
revolution. Freed from all resemblance, 
freed even from their own double, they 
expand like the system of production, of 
which they are only the miniaturized 
equivalent. The revenge of the simulacrum 
that feeds the myth of the sorcerer's 



95 



Jean Baudrillard 



apprentice doesn't happen with the auto- 
maton. It is, on the other hand, the very law 
of the second type; and from that law 
proceeds still the hegemony of the robot, of 
the machine, and of dead work over living 
labor. This hegemony is necessary for the 
cycle of production and reproduction. It is 
with this reversal that we leave behind the 
counterfeit to enter (re)production. We 
leave natural law and the play of its forms to 
enter the realm of the mercantile law of 
value and its calculations of force. 

The Industrial Simulacrum 

It is a new generation of signs and 
objects which comes with the industrial 
revolution. Signs without the tradition of 
caste, ones that will never have known any 
binding restrictions. They will no longer 
have to be counterfeited, since they are going 
to be produced all at once on a gigantic scale. 
The problem of their uniqueness, or their 
origin, is no longer a matter of concern; their 
origin is technique, and the only sense they 
possess is in the dimension of the industrial 
simulacrum. 



96 



The Orders of Simulacra 

Which is to say the series, and even the 
possibility of two or of n identical objects. 
The relation between them is no longer that 
of an original to its counterfeit — neither 
analogy nor reflection— but equivalence, 
indifference. In a series, objects become 
undefined simulacra one of the other. And 
so, along with the objects, do the men that 
produce them. Only the obliteration of the 
original reference allows for the generalized 
law of equivalence, that is to say the very 
possibility of production. 

The entire analysis of production changes 
according to whether you no longer see in it 
an original process, or even one that is at the 
core of all the others, but on the contrary a 
process of absorption of all original being 
and of introduction to a series of identical 
beings. Until now we have considered 
production and work as potential, as force, as 
historical process, as generic activity; the 
energetic-economic myth proper to modernity. 
We must now ask if production does not 
interfere in the order of signs, as a particular 
phase — if it is not basically only an episode in 
the line of simulacra: that precisely when, 
thanks to technique, potentially identical 



97 



Jean Baudrillard 



beings are produced in an indefinite series. 
The immense energies that are at work 
in technique, industry, and the economy 
should not hide the fact that it is basically 
only a matter of attaining to that indefinite 
reproducibility. That is the challenge cer- 
tainly to the "natural" order, but finally is 
only a second-order simulacrum, and rather 
inadequate as an imaginary solution to the 
problem of mastering the world. By com- 
parison to the era of the counterfeit (the 
time of the double and the mirror, of theatre 
and the games of mask and appearance), the 
serial and technical era of reproduction is all- 
in-alt a time of lesser scope (the era that 
follows — that of models of simulation and of 
third-order simulacra— is of more consider- 
able dimension). 

It is Walter Benjamin who, in The Work of 
Art in the Era of its Technical Reproductibility, first 
elicited the implications essential in this 
principle of reproduction. He shows that 
reproduction absorbs the process of produc- 
tion, changing its finalities and altering the 
status of product and producer. He demon- 
strates this mutation on the terrain of art, 
cinema and photography, because it is there 



98 



The Orders of Simulacra 



that open up, in the 20th century, new 
territories without a tradition of classical 
productivity, and that are placed immediately 
under the sign of reproduction. But we know 
that today all material production enters into 
this sphere. We know that now it is on the 
level of reproduction (fashion, media, public- 
ity, information and communication net- 
works), on the level of what Marx negligently 
called the nonessential sectors of capital (we 
can hereby take stock of the irony of history), 
that is to say in thesphere of simulacra and of 
the code, that the global process of capital is 
founded. Benjamin first (and later McLuhan) 
understood technique not as a "productive 
force" (wherein marxist analysis is locked) 
but as medium, as form and principle of a 
whole new generation of sense. The fact 
alone that anything might be simply re- 
produced, as such, in two copies, is already a 
revolution; you only have to consider the 
shock of the African native seeing, for the 
very first time, two identical books. That 
these two products of technique should be 
equivalent under the sign of socially necessary 
work is less important in the long run than 
the serial repetition of the same object (which 



99 



Jean Baudrillard 



is also that of individuals as force-of-work). 
Technique as medium dominates not only 
the "message" of the product (it's use- value) 
but also the force-of-work that Marx wished 
to make the revolutionary message of 
production. Benjamin andMcLuhan saw this 
matter more clearly than Marx; they saw the 
true message: tlie true ultimatum was in reproduction 
itself, And that production no longer has any 
sense; its social finality is lost in the series. 
The simulacra win out over history. 

Furthermore, this stage of seriaJ re- 
production (that of the industrial mechanism, 
of the factory belt, of expanded reproduction) 
is ephemeral. As soon as dead work wins out 
over living work — that is, as soon as the era 
of primitive accumulation is over — serial 
production yields to generation by means of 
models. And here it is a question of a reversal 
of origin and finality, for all the forms change 
once they are not so much mechanically 
reproduced but even conceived from the poinl~of- 
view of their very reproducibility, diffracted from a 
generating nucleus we call the model. Here we 
are in the third-order simulacra; no longer 
that of the counterfeit of an original as in the 
first-order, nor that of the pure series as in 



100 



The Orders of Simulacra 



the second. Here are the models from which 
proceed all forms according to the modulation 
of their differences. Only affiliation to the 
model makes sense, and nothing flows any 
longer according to its end, but proceeds 
from the model, the "signifier of reference," 
which is a kind of anterior finality and the 
only resemblance there is. We are in 
simulation in the modern sense of the word, 
of which industrialization is but the final 
manifestation. Finally, it is not serial re- 
producibility which is fundamental, but the 
modulation. Not quantitative equivalences, 
but distinctive oppositions. No longer the law 
of capital, but the structural law of value. 
And not only shouldn't we look to technique 
or the economy for the secrets of the code; it 
is, on the contrary, the very possibility of 
industrial production that we should look for 
in the genesis of the code and the simulacra. 
Each order submits to the order following. 
Just like the order of the counterfeit was 
abolished by that of serial production (we can 
see how art has passed entirely into the realm 
of the "mechanical"), so in the same way the 
entire order of production is in the process of 
tumbling into operational simulation. 



101 



Jean Baudrillard 



The analyses of Benjamin and McLuhan 
are situated on these limits of reproduction 
and simulation, at the point where referential 
reason disappears, and where production is 
no longer sure of itself- In this sense they 
mark a decisive progress compared to the 
analyses of Veblen and Goblot. These latter, 
describing for example the signs of fashion, 
still refer to the classical configuration: the 
signs constitute a distinct material, have a 
finality and use for prestige, status, social 
differentiation They manifest a strategy 
contemporaneous to that of profit and 
merchandise with Marx, at a time when you 
could still talk about the use-value of a sign or 
of force- of -work, when purely and simply, 
one could still talk about an economy because 
there was still a Reason of the sign, and a 
Reason of production. 



102 



The Orders of Simulacra 



The Metaphysic of the Code 

"Leibniz, that mathematical spirit, 
saw in the mystic elegance of 
the binary system that counts 
only the zero and the one, the 
very image of creation. The 
unity of the supreme Being, 
operating by binary function in 
nothingness, would have sufficed 
to bring out of it all the beings." 
McLuhan 

The great simulacra constructed by man 
pass from a universe of natural laws to a 
universe of force and tensions of force, today to 
a universe of structures and binary oppositions. 
After the metaphysic of being and appearance, 
after that of energy and determination, comes 
that of indeterminacy and the code. Cybernetic 
control generation from model, differential 
modulation, feed-back, question/ answer, etc.: 
such is the new operational configuration (in- 
dustrial simulacra are only operational). Digital- 
ly is its metaphysical principle (the God of 
Leibniz), and DNA its prophet. It is in effect in 
the genetic code that the "genesis of simulacra*' 



103 



Jean Baudrillard 



today finds its most accomplished form. At 
the limit of an always more extensive 
abolition of references and finalities, of the 
loss of resemblance and designation, we find 
the digital program-sign, whose value is 
purely tactical, at the intersection of the other 
signals (corpuscles of information/ test) and 
whose structure is that of a macro- molecular 
code of command and control, 

At this level the question of signs, of their 
rational destination, their real or imaginary, 
their repression, their deviation, the illusion 
they create or that which they conceal, or 
their parallel meanings— all of that is erased. 
We have already seen signs of the first order, 
complex signs and rich in illusion, change, 
with the machines, into crude signs, dull, 
industrial, repetitive, echoless, operational 
and efficacious. What a mutation, even more 
radical still, with signals of the code, illegible, 
with no gloss possible, buried like program- 
matic matrices light-years away in the depths 
of the "biological" body — black boxes where 
all the commandments, all the answers 
ferment! End of the theatre of representation, 
the space of signs, their conflict, their silence; 
only the black box of the code, the molecular 



104 



The Orders of Simulacra 

emitter of signals from which we have been 
irradiated, crossed by answers/questions like 
signifying radiations, tested continuously by 
our own program inscribed in the cells. Jail 
cells, electronic cells, party cells, micro- 
biological cells: always the search for the 
smallest indivisible element, whose organic 
synthesis would be made according to the 
givens of the code. But the code itself is but a 
genetic cell, a generator where myriads of 
intersections produce all the questions and 
possible solutions, so that choices (by whom?) 
can be made. No finality involved with these 
"questions" (informational and signifying 
impulsions) but the answer, genetically un- 
changeable or inflected by minute and 
aleatory differences. Space is no longer even 
linear or one-dimensional: cellular space, in- 
definite generation of the same signals, like 
the tics of a prisoner gone crazy with solitude 
and repetition. Such is the genetic code: an 
erased record, unchangeable, of which we are 
no more than cells-for-reading. All aura of 
sign, of significance itself is resolved in this 
determination; all is resolved in the inscription 
and decodage. 

Such is the third-order simulacrum, our 



105 



Jean Baudrillard 



own. Such is the "mystic elegance of the binary 
system, of the zero and the one", from which 
all being proceeds. Such is the status of the sign 
that is also the end of signification: DNA or 
operational simulation. 

All of this is perfectly well summed up by 
Sebeok ("Genetics and Semiotics", in Versus): 
Numerous observations confirm the 
hypothesis that the internal organic world 
descends in a straight line from the 
primordial forms of life. The most remark* 
able fact is the omnipresence of the DNA 
molecule. The genetic material of all 
organisms known on earth is in great 
measure made up of the nudeonic acids 
DNA and RNA that contain in their 
information structure, transmitted by 
reproduction from one generation to 
another and furthermore gifted with the 
capacity of self- reproduction and imitation. 
Briefly, the genetic code is universal, or 
almost Its deciphering was an immense 
discovery, in the sense that it showed that 
"the two languages of the great polymers, 
the language of nudeonic acid and that of 
protein, are tightly correlated" (Crick, 
1966; Clarck/Narcker, 1968); The Soviet 
mathematician Liapounov demonstrated 
in 1963 that all living systems transmit by 
prescribed canals with precision a small 



106 



The Orders of Simulacra 



quantity of energy or of matter containing 
a great volume of information, which is 
responsible for the ulterior control of a 
great quantity of energy and matter. In 
this perspective numerous phenomena, 
biological as well as cultural (stockage, 
feed-back, canalization of messages and 
others) can be seen as aspects of the 
treatment of information. In the last 
analysis information appears in great part 
as the repetition of information, or even as 
another sort of information, a sort of 
control that seems to be a universal 
property of terrestrial life, independent of 
form or substance. 

Five years ago 1 drew attention to the 
convergence of genetics and linguistics — 
autonomous disciplines, but parallel in the 
larger field of communication science (of 
which animal semiotics alsi is a part). The 
terminology of genetics is full of expres- 
sions taken from linguistics and communi- 
cation theory (Jacobson, 1968), which also 
underlined either the major resemblances 
or the important differences of structure 
a nd of function between genetic and verbal 
codes. . . It is obvious today t hat the genetic 
code must be considered the most funda- 
mental of all the semiotic networks, and 
therefore a prototype of all the other 
systems of signaling that animals use, man 



107 



Jean BaudriUard 



included. From this point of view, molecules 
which are systems of quanta and behave 
like stable vehicles of physical information, 
systems of animal semiotics and cultural 
systems, including language, constitute a 
continuous chain of stages, with always 
more complex energy levels, in the frame- 
work of a universal unique evolution. It is 
therefore possible to describe either lan- 
guage or living systems from a unified 
cybernetic point- of- view. For the present, 
this is only a useful analogy ora prediction. 
A reciprocal rapprochement between animal 
communication and linguistics can lead to a 
complete knowledge of the dynamics of 
semiotics, and such a knowledge can be 
.revealed, in the last analysis, to be nothing 
less than the very definition of life. 

And so the current strategic model is 
designed that everywhere is replacing the 
great ideological model which constituted 
political economy in its time. 

You will find it under the rigorour sign 
of "science" in the Chance and Necessity of 
Jacques Monod. The end of dialectical 
evolution, it is the discontinuous indeter- 
minism of the genetic code that now controls 
life — the teleological principle. Finality no 
longer belongs to the term; there is no longer 



108 



The Orders of Simulacra 

a term, nor a determination. Finality is there 
beforehand, inscribed in the code. We see 
that nothing has changed— simply the order 
of ends yields to the play of molecules, and 
the order of signifieds to the play of 
infinitesimal signifiers, reduced to their 
aleatory commutation. All the transcendant 
finalities reduced to a dashboard full of 
instruments. There is still, however, re- 
course to a nature, to an inscription in 
"biological" nature — in actuality, a nature 
distorted by fantasy like she always was, 
metaphysical sanctuary no longer of origin 
and substance, but this time of the code; the 
code must have an "objective" basis. What 
could be better for that purpose than the 
molecule and genetics? Monod is the strict 
theologian of this molecular transcendance, 
Edgar Morin the rapt disciple (A.D.N.* + 
Adonait). But for one as well as the other, the 
fantasy of the code, which is equivalent to 
the reality of power, is merged with 
molecular idealism. 

Thus we find once more in history that 
delirious illusion of unting the world under 

TJ.N.A. 



109 



Jean Baudrillard 



the aegis of a single principle — that of a 
homogenous substance with the Jesuits of 
the Counter Reformation; that of the 
genetic code with the technocrats of biologi- 
cal science {but also linguistics as well), with 
Leibniz and his binary divinity as precursor. 
For the program here aimed at has nothing 
genetic about it, it is a social and historical 
program. That which is hypostatized in 
biochemistry is the ideal of a social order 
ruled by a sort of genetic code of macro- 
molecular calculation, of P.P.B.S. (Planned 
Programming Budgeting System), irradiat- 
ing the social body with its operational 
circuits. The technical cybernetic finds its 
"natural philosophy" here, as Monod says. 
The fascination of the biological, of the 
biomedical dates from the very beginnings of 
science. It was at work in Spencerian 
organicism (sociobiology) on the level of 
second- and third-order structures (Jacob's 
classification in The Logic of Life, it is active 
today in modern biochemistry, on the level 
of structures of the fourth-order). 

Coded similarities and dissimilarities: 
that is certainly the image of cyberniticized 
social exchange. You only have to add 



110 



The Orders of Simulacra 

"stereospecific complex" in order to re-inject 
intracellular communication; that Morin will 
come to transfigure into molecular Eros. 

Practically and historically, this signified 
the substitution of social control by the end 
(and by a more or less dialectical providence 
which surveys the accomplishment of this 
end) for social control by anticipation, 
simulation and programming, and indeter- 
minate mutation directed by the code. 
Instead of a process which is finalized 
according to its ideal development, we 
generalize from a moiM. Instead of aright to a 
prophecy, we have the right of registration. 
There is no really radical difference between 
the two, only the schemes of control have 
become fantastically perfected. From a 
capitalist-productivist society to a neo- 
capitalist cybernetic order that aims now at 
total control. This is the mutation for which 
the biological theorization of the code 
prepares the ground. There is nothing of an 
accident in this mutation. It is the end of a 
history in which, successively, God, Man, 
Progress, and History itself die to profit the 
code, in which transcendance dies to profit 
immanence, the latter corresponding to a 



111 



Jean Baudrillard 

much more advanced phase in the vertiginous 
manipulation of social rapports. 

In its indefinite reproduction, the system 
puts an end to the myth of its origin and to all 
the referential values it has itself secreted along 
the way. Putting an end to its myth of 
beginning, it ends its internal contradictions 
(no more real or referential to be confronted 
with), and it puts an end also to the myth of its 
own end the revolution itself. What was 
profiled with revolution was the victory of 
human and generic reference, of the original 
potential of man. But if capital erases from the 
map generic man himself {for the sake of 
genetic man?) the Golden Age of the revolu- 
tion was that of capital, where the myths of 
origin and end still circulated. Once short- 
circuited the myths (and the only danger capital 
confronted historically came to it from this 
mythical exigency of rationality that accompa- 
nied it from the very beginning) in an opera tion- 
ality of fact and without discourse, once capital 
itself has become its own myth, or rather an 
interminable machine, aleatory, something 
like a social genetic code, it no longer leaves 
any room for a planned reversal; and this 
is its true violence. It remains to be seen if this 



112 



The Orders of Simulacra 

operationality is not itself a myth, if DNA is not 
also a myth. 

Once and for all there is posed, in effect, 
the problem of science as discourse. A good 
occasion to pose it here, where this discourse 
is absolutized with such candor. "Plato, 
Heraclitus, Hegel, Marx; these ideological 
edifices, presented as a prion, were really 
a posteriori constructions, destined to justify 
a preconceived ethico- political theory . . . 
The only a priori for science is the postulate of 
objectivity, that forbids itself any part in this 
debate." (Monod). But this postulate results 
itself from a never innocent decision for 
objectification of the world and of the "real." In 
fact it is the coherence of a certain discourse, and 
all scientific movement is nothing but the space 
of this discourse, never revealing itself as such, 
and the "objective" simulacrum of which hides 
the political, strategic word. A little farther on, 
furthermore, Monod very well expresses the 
arbitrary nature of this phenomenon: "We 
might wonder if all the" invariance, conserva- 
tions and symmetries that constitute the 
scheme of scientific discourse are only fictions 
substituted for reality so as to offer an 
operational image. . . A logic founded on a 



113 



Jean Baudrillard 

purely abstract principle of identity possibly 
conventional. Convention, however, that human 
reason seems incapable of doing without." You 
couldn't say it better: that science has selected 
itself as generating formula, a model discourse, 
upon the faith of a conventional order (not just 
any, however; that of total reduction). But 
Monod slides rapidly into this dangerous 
hypothesis of a "conventional" identity prin- 
ciple. It would be better to base science, more 
crudely, upon an "objective" reality. Physics is 
there to witness that identity is only a 
postulate — it is within things, since there is 
"absolute identity of two atoms in the same 
quantitative state" Well then? Convention, or 
objective reality? The truth is that science is 
organized, like any other discourse, on the 
basis of a conventional logic, but it demands for 
its justification, like any other ideological 
discourse, a real "objective" reference, in a 
process of substance. If the principle of identity 
is somehow "true," even at the infinitesimal 
level of two atoms, then the entireconventional 
edifice of science that derives its inspiration 
from that level is also "true." The hypothesis of 
the genetic code, DNA, is also true and 
unsurpassable. So it goes with metaphysics. 



114 



The Orders of Simulacra 



Science accounts for things previously encircled 
and formalized so as to be sure to obey it. 
"Objectivity" is nothing else than that, and the 
ethic which comes to sanction this objective 
knowlegde is nothing less than a system of 
defense and imposed ignorance, whose goal is 
to preserve this vicious circle intact. * 

"Down with all hypotheses that have 
allowed the belief in a true world/' said 
Nietzsche. 

The Tactile and the Digital 

This regulation on the model of the 
genetic code is not at all limited to laboratory 
effects or to the exalted visions of theoreticians. 
Banal, everyday life is invested by these 
models. Digitality is with us. It is that which 
haunts all the messages, all the signs of our 
societies. The most concrete form you see it in 
is that of the test, of the question/ answer, of 
the stimulus/ response. All content is neutral- 
ized by a continual procedure of directed 
interrogation, of verdicts and ultimatums to 
decode, which no longer arise this time from 
the depths of the genetic code but that have the 
same tactical indeterminacy — the cycle of sense 



115 



]ean Baudrillard 

being infinitely shortened into that of question/ 
answer, of bit or minute quantity of energy/ 
information coming back to its beginning, the 
cycle only describing the perpetual reactualiza- 
tion of the same models. The equivalent of the 
total neutralization of the signified by the code 
is the instantaneous ness of the verdict of 
fashion, or of any advertising or media 
message. Any place where the offer swallows 
up the demand, where the question assimilates 
the answer, or absorbs and regurgitates it in a 
decodable form, or invents and anticipates it in 
a predictible form. Everywhere the same 
"scenario," the scenario of "trial and error" {guinea 
pigs in laboratory expenments), the scenario of 
the breadth of choice offered everywhere ("the 
personality test") — everywhere the test func- 
ctions as a fundamental form of control, by 
means of the infinite divisibility of practices and 
responses. 

We live by the mode of referendum precisely 
because there is no longer any referential- Every 
sign, every message (objects of "functional" use 
as well as any item of fashion or televised news, 
poll or electoral consultation) is presented to us 
as question/ answer. The entire system of 
communication has passed from that of a 



116 



The Orders of Simulacra 



syntactically complex language structure to a 
binary sign system of quest ion/ answer — of 
perpetual test- Now tests and referenda are, we 
know, perfect forms of simulation: the answer 
is called forth by the question, it is design-ated in 
advance. The referendum is always an ultimatum: the 
unilateral nature of the question, that is no 
longer exactly an interrogation, but the 
immediate imposition of a sense whereby the 
cycle is suddenly completed. Every message is a 
verdict, just like the one that comes from 
polling statistics. The simulacrum of distance 
{or even of contradiction between the two 
poles) is only — like the effect of the real the 
sign seems to emit— a tactical hallucination. 

Benjamin analyzes concretely, on the level 
of the technical instrument, this operation of 
the test: 

The performance of the movie actor is 
transmitted to the public by means of an 
array of technical instruments, with a 
twofold consequence. The camera that 
presents the performance of the film actor 
to the public need not respect the perform- 
ance as an integral whole. Guided by the 
cameraman, the camera continually changes 
its position with respect to the performance . 
The sequence of positional views which the 



117 



Jean Baudriilard 



editor composes from the material supplied 
him constitutes the completed film. Hence, 
the performance of the actor is subjected to a 
series of optical tests This is the first 
consequence of the fact that the actor's 
performance is presented by means of the 
camera. Also, the film actor lacks the 
opportunity of the stage actor to adjust to t he 
audience during the performance, since he 
does not present his performance to the 
audience in person. This permits the audience 
to take the position of the critic, without 
experiencing any personal contact with the 
actor The audience's identification with the 
actor is really an identification with the 
camera. Consequently the audience takes the 
position of the camera; its approach is that of 
testing. 

Note; The expansion of the field of the 
testable which mechanical equipment brings 
about for the actor corresponds to the 
extraordinary expansion of the field of the 
testable brought about for the individual 
through economic conditions. Thus, voca- 
tional aptitude tests become constantly more 
important. What matters in these tests are 
segmental performances of the individual. 
The film shot and the vocational aptitude test 
are taken before a committee of experts, The 
camera director in the studio occupies a place 
identical with that of the examiner during 



118 



The Orders of Simulacra 



aptitude tests. {Translated by H. Zohn in 
Silu minai tons, from "The Work of Art in the 
Age of Mechanical Reproduction.") 

"The work of art with the dadaists 
becomes a projectile. It plunges in on the 
spectator, it takes on a tactile quality. The 
diverging element in film is also first-and- 
foremost a tactile element, based effectually 
on the constant change of place and camera 
angles that stimulate the spectator." 

No contemplation is possible. The images 
fragment perception into successive sequences, 
into stimuli toward which there can be only 
instantaneous response, yes or no — the limit of 
an abbreviated reaction. Film no longer allows 
you toquestion.lt questions you, and directly. It 
is in this sense that the modern media call for, 
according to McLuhan, i a greater degree of 
immediate participation, an incessant response, 
a total plasticity (Benjamin compares the work 
of the cameraman to that of the surgeon: 
tactility and manipulation). The role of the 
message is no longer information, but testing 
and polling, and finally control ("contra- role," in 
the sense that all your answers are already 
inscribed in the "role," on the anticipated 
registers of the code). Montage and codification 



119 



lean Baudriilard 



demand, in effect, that the receiver construe 
and decode by observing the same procedure 
whereby the work was assembled. The reading 
of the message is then only a perpetual 
examination of the code. 

Every image, every media message, but 
also any functional environmental object, is 
a test — that is to say, in the full rigor of 
the term, liberating response mechanisms 
according to stereotypes and analytic models. 
Today, the object is no longer "functional" in 
the traditional meaning of the word; it no 
longer serves you, it fete you. It has nothing to 
do with the object of yesteryear, no more than 
does media news with a "reality" of facts. Both 
objects and information result already from a 
selection, a montage, from a point-of-view. 
They have already tested "reality," and have 
asked only questions that "answered back" to 
them. They have broken down reality into 
simple elements that they have reassembled 
into scenarios of regulated oppositions, exactly 
in the same way that the photographer imposes 
his contrasts, lights, angles on his subject (any 
photographer will teD you: you can do anything, 
all you have to do is approach the original from 
the right angle, at that right moment or mood 



120 



The Orders of Simulacra 

that will render it the correct answer to the 
instantaneous test of the instrument and its 
code). It is exactly like the test or the 
referendum when they translate a conflict or 
problem into a game of question/answer. And 
reality, thus tested, tests you according to the 
same grill; you decode it according to the same 
code, inscribed within each message and object 
like a miniaturized genetic code. 

All is presented today in a spread-out 
series, or as part of a line of products, and 
this fact alone tests you already, because you 
are obliged to make decisions. This ap- 
proximates our general attitude toward the 
world around us to that of a rending, and to 
a selectivedeciphering. We live less like users 
than readers and selectors, reading cells. But 
nevertheless: by the same token you also are 
constantly selected and tested by the medium 
itself. Just like cutting out a sample for the ends 
of the survey, the media frame and excise their 
message bundles, which are in fact bundles of 
selected questions, samples of their audience. 
By a circular operation of experimental modifi- 
cation, of incessant interference, like a nervous 
input, tactile and retractile, that explores an 
object by means of brief perceptive sequences, 



121 



lean Baudrillard 



until it has been localized and controlled. What 
the media thereby localize and control are no 
real and autonomous groups, but samples, 
samples modelled socially and mentally by a 
barrage of messages. "Public opinion" is evident- 
ly the prettiest of these samples — not an unreal 
political substance, but one that is hyperreal— a 
fantastic hyperreality that lives only off of 
montage and test- manipulation. 

The eruption of the binary scheme ques- 
tion/answer is of an incalculable importance. It 
renders inarticulate every discourse. It short- 
circuits all that was, in a golden age come again, 
the dialectic of signifier and signified, of a 
representing and a represented. It is the end of 
objects whose meaning would be function, and 
of opinions that "representative" representatives 
would be able to vote for. It is the end of the reai 
intarrogation to which it was possible to answer 
(the end especially to unanswerable questions). 
This process has been entirely overthrown. The 
contradictory process of true and false, of real 
and the imaginary, is abolished in this hyperreal 
logic of 'montage. Michel Tort, in his book 
Intelligence Quotient, analyzes this quite well* 
"What is going to determine the answer to the 
question is not the question as such in the form 



122 



The Orders of Simulacra 



in which it was posed, it is also the idea that the 
interrogated subject forms about the most 
appropriate tactic to adopt in function of the 
concept he has formed about the expectations 
of the interrogator." And further "The artifact 
is something else entirely than a controlled 
transformation of the object for the ends of 
knowledge, it is a rude interference with reality, 
at the end of which it is impossible to say what 
in reality can be objectively known and what is 
the result of technical intervention (medium). 
The I.Q. is an artifact." No more true or false, 
because no more distinguishable hiatus between 
question and response. In the light of the tests, 
intelligence, like opinion — and more generally 
the entire process of meaning — is reduced to 
the"ability to produce contrasting reactions toa 
growing series of adequate stimuli." 

This entire analysis sends us back to 
McLuhan's formula: "The Medium is the 
Message." It is in effect the medium— the very 
style of montage, of decoupage, of interpella- 
tion, solicitation, summation, by the medium — 
which controls the process of meaning. And 
you understand why McLuhan saw in the era 
of the great electronic media an era of tadile 
communication. We are closer here in effect to 



123 



Jean Baudrillard 

the tactile than to the visual universe, where 
the distancing is greater and reflection is always 
possible. At the same time as touch loses its 
sensorial sensual value for us ("touching is an 
interaction of the senses rather than a simple 
contact of an object with the skin"), it is possible 
that it returns as the strategy of a universe of 
communication — but as the field of tactile and 
tactical simulation, where the message becomes 
"massage," tentacular soliritatioa test. Every- 
where you're tested, palpated, the method is 
"tactical," the sphere of communication is 
"tactile." Without even speaking of the ideology 
of "contact," that is being pushed in all its forms 
as a substitute for social rapport, there is an 
entire social configuration that orbits around 
the test (the question/ answer cell) as around the 
commandments of the molecular code. 

The political sphere entirely loses its 
specificity when it enters into the game of the 
media and public opinion polls, that is to say into 
the sphere of the integrated circuit of question/ 
answer. The electoral sphere is in any case the 
first great institution where social exchange is 
reduced to obtaining an answer. It is due to this 
sign-simplification that it is the first one to 
become universal. Universal suffrage is the first 



124 



The Orders of Simulacra 

of the mass- media. AD through the 19 th and 
20th centuries political and economic practice 
merge increasingly into the same type of 
discourse. Propaganda and advertising fuse in 
the same marketing and merchandising of 
objects and ideologies. This convergence of 
language between the economic and the 
political is furthermore what marks a society 
such as ours, where "political economy" is fully 
realized. It is also by the same token its end 
since the two spheres are abolished in an 
entirely separate reality, or hyperreality, which 
is that of the media. There, too, there is an 
elevation of each term to a greater power, that 
of the third-order simulacra. 

'That many regret the 'corruption' of 
politics by the media, deploring that TV and 
public opinion polls have replaced so quickly the 
formation of opinion, shows only that they 
understand nothing about politics." 

What is characteristic of this phase of 
political hyperrealism is the necessary conjunc- 
tion between the bipartite system and the entry 
into the play of the polls as mirror of this 
alternating equivalence of the political game. 

The polls are located in a dimension beyond 
all social produdion. They refer only to a 



125 



Jean Baudrillard 



simulacrum of public opinion. A mirror of 
opinion analogous in its way to that of the Gross 
National Product imaginary mirror of the 
productive forces, without regard to their social 
ends or lack thereof. What is essential is only 
that "it" reproduces itself. The same as for 
public opinion: what is essential is that it 
shadow itself incessantly in its own image. 
Therein lies the secret of mass representation. 
It is no longer necessary that anyone produce an 
opinion, all that is needed is that all reproduce 
public opinion, in the sense that all opinions get 
caught up in this kind of general equivalent, and 
once more proceed from it (reproduce it, 
whatever they make of it, on the level of 
individual choice). For opinions as for material 
goods: production is dead, long live reproduction. 

If Md.uhan's formula makes any sense it is 
certainly in this connection, * Public opinion is 
par excellence at the same time medium and 
message. And the polls that inform it are the 
incessant imposition of the medium as message. 
In this sense they are of the same nature as TV 
and the electronic media, which we have seen are 
also only a perpetual game of question/ answer, 
an instrument of perpetual polling. 

The poDs manipulate that which cannot be 



126 



The Orders of Simulacra 



decided. Do they really affect the vote? True, 
false? Do they give an exact picture of reality, or 
simple tendencies, or the refraction of this 
reality in a hypers pace of simulation whose 
curve even is unknown? True, false, un- 
decidable. Their most sophisticated analyses 
leave room always for the reversibility of the 
hypotheses. Statistics is only casuistry. This un- 
decidabSe quality is proper to any process of 
simulation (see above, the crisis of indecision). 
The internal logic of these procedures (statistics, 
probability, operational cybernetics) is certainly 
rigorous and "scientific'*; somehow though it 
does not stick, it is a fabulous fiction whose 
index of refraction in any reality (true or false) is 
nil This is even what gives these models their 
forcefulness. But also it is this which only leaves 
them, as truth, the paranoid projection tests of a 
case, or of a group which dreams of a 
miraculous correspondance of the real to their 
models, and therefore of an absolute manipula- 
tion. 

What is true of the statistics scenario is also 
true of the regulated partition of the political 
sphere the alternation of the forces in power, 
majority/ minority, substitutive, etc On this 
limit of pure representation, "that" no longer 



127 



Jean Baudrillard 

represents anything. Politics die of thetoo-well- 
regulated game of distinctive oppositions. The 
political sphere (and that of power in general) 
becomes empty. This is somehow the payment 
for the accomplishing of the political class' 
desire that of a perfect manipulation of social 
representation. Surreptitiously and silently, all 
social substance has left this machine in the 
very moment of its perfect reproduction. 

The same thing holds true for the polls. 
The only ones who believe in them finally are 
the members of the political class, just as the 
only ones who really believe in advertising and 
market studies are the marketeers and ad- 
vertisers. This is not because they are parti- 
cularly stupid (though that we can't exclude 
either) but because the polls are homogenous 
with the current functioning of politics. They 
take on a "real" tactical value, they come into 
play as a factor in the regulation of the political 
class according to its own rules of the game. It 
therefore has reason to believe in them, and it 
believes. But who else does, really? It is the 
political class' burlesque spectacle, hyper- 
representative of nothing at all, that people 
taste by way of the polls and media. There is a 
jubilation proper to spectacular nullity, and the 



128 



The Orders of Simulacra 

last form it takes is that of statistical contemplation. 
This is accompanied always, we know, by a 
profound disappointment — the kind of dis- 
illusion that the polls provoke in absorbing so 
utterly the public's voice, in short-circuiting all 
process of expression. The fascination they 
exercise is in accordance with this neutralization 
by emptiness, with this trance they create by 
anticipation of the image over all possible reality. 

The problem of the polls e not at all that of 
their objective influence. Just as for propaganda 
or publicity, their influence is negated by 
individual or collective inertia or resistance. The 
problem is the operational simulation that they 
institute over the entire spectrum of social 
practices: that of the progressive kucemiazation of 
all social substance, that is the substitution for 
blood of the white lymph of media. 

The question/answer cyde finds extension 
in all domains. You slowly find that the entire 
realm of inquiries, polls, and statistics needs to be 
looked at again in relation to this radical suspicion 
which falls upon their methods. But the selfsame 
suspicion falls on ethnology. Unless you admit 
that the natives are perfect naturals, incapable of 
simulation, the problem is the same as here the 
impossibility of obtaining for a directed question 



129 



Jean Baudrilkird 



any answer other than simu/afaf (other than 
reproducing the question). It isn't even certain 
that you can interrogate plants, animals, nor 
even inert matter in the exact sciences with any 
chance of "objective*' response. As to the 
response of the polled to the poll-takers, the 
natives to the ethnologist, the analyzed to the 
analyst, you can be sure that the circularity is 
total the ones questioned always pretend to be as 
the question imagines and solicits them to be. 
Even psychoanalytic transference and counter- 
transference fall today under the sway of this 
stimulated, simulated-anticipated response, 
which is none other than the very model of the 
self-fulfilling prophecy. 5 We come then upon 
a strange paradox: the word of the polled, the 
analyzed, the natives, is irremediably short- 
circuited and lost, and it is on the basis of this 
foreclosure that these respective disciplines — 
ethnology, psychoanalysis, sociology— are going 
to be able to experience such marvelous 
growth. But they become puffed-up on mere 
wind, for it is in that respect that the circular 
response of the polled, the analyzed, the natives 
is all the same a challenge and a triumphant 
revenge. It is that they place the spotlight back 
on the question itself, isolate it in offering it the 



130 



The Orders of Simulacra 



mirror of the answer it was awaiting, and show 
it helpless to ever quit the vicious circle which in 
fact is that of power. Just as in the electoral 
system, in which the representatives no longer 
represent anything because they control so well 
the responses of the electoral body. But 
everything has, somehow, eluded the ruling 
class' grasp. This is why the dominated answer 
of the natives is all the same a real response, a 
desperate vengeance that of letting power bury 
power. 

The "advanced democratic" systems are 
stabilized on the formula of bipartite alterna- 
tion. The monopoly in fact remains that of a 
homogenous political class, from left to right, 
but it must not be exercised as such. The one- 
party totalitarian regime is an unstable form — it 
defuses the political scene, it no longer assures 
the feed-back of public opinion, the minimal 
flux in the integrated circuit which constitutes 
the transistorized poirical machine. Alternation, 
on the other hand, is the end of the end of 
representation, so solicitation is maximal by 
dint of simple formal constraint, when you are 
approaching most nearly a perfect competitive 
equation between the two parties. This is 
logical. Democracy realizes the law of equi- 



131 



Jean Baudrillard 



valence in the political order. This law is 
accomplished in the back- and- forth movement 
of the two terms which reactivates their 
equivalence but allows, by the minute differ- 
ence, a public consensus to be formed and the 
cycle of representation to be dosed. Operational 
theatre, where the only play staged anymore is 
the fulginous reflection of political Reason. The 
"free choice" of individuals, which is the credo of 
democracy, leads in fact precisely to the 
opposite the vote becomes functionally obligatory: 
if it is not legally,* it is by statistical constraint, 
the structure of alternation, reinforced by the 
polls. 6 The vote becomes functionally aleatory'. 
when democracy attains an advanced formal 
stage, it distributes itself around equal quotients 
(50/50). The vote comes toresembleaBrownian 
movement of particles or the calculation of 
probabilities. It is as if everyone voted by 
chance, or monkeys voted 

At this point it makes no difference at all 
what the parties in power are expressing 
historically and socially. It is necessary even that 
they represent nothing the fascination of the 
game, the polls, the formal and statistical 
compulsion of the game is all the greater. 

"Classical" universal suffrage already im- 



132 



The Orders of Simulacra 



plies a certain neutralization of the political 
field, if only by the consensus on the rules of the 
game. But you can still distinguish therein the 
representatives from the represented, on the 
basis of a real social antagonism of opinion. It is 
the neutralization of this contradictory referent 
under the sign of a public opinion from now on 
equal unto itself, mediated and homogenized by 
anticipation (the polls) that will make alterna- 
tion possible "at the top": simulation of 
opposition between two parties, absorption of 
their respective objectives, reversibility of the 
entire discourse one into the other. 1 1 is, beyond 
the representing and the represented, the pure 
form of representation — just as simulation 
characterizes, beyond the signifier and the 
signified, the pure form of the political economy 
of the sign— exactly as the floating of currency 
and its countable relations characterizes, beyond 
use and exchange value, beyond all substance of 
production, the pure form of value. 

It might appear that the historical move- 
ment of capital carries it from one open 
competition towards oligopoly, then towards 
monopoly — that the democratic movement 
goes from multiple parties toward bipartism, 
then toward the single party. Nothing of the 



133 



Jean Baudrillard 



sort: oligopoly, or the current duopoly results 
from a tactical doubling of monopoly. In all domains 
duopoly is the final stage of monopoly. It is not 
the public will (state intervention, anti-trust 
laws, etc.) which breaks up the monopoly of the 
market — it is the fact that any unitary system, if 
it wishes to survive, must acquire a binary 
regulation. This changes nothing as far as 
monopoly is concerned. On the contrary, 
power is absolute only if it is capable of 
diffraction into various equivalents, if it knows 
how to take off so as to put more on. This goes 
for brands of soap-suds as well as peaceful co- 
existence. You need two superpowers to keep 
the universe under control: a single empire 
would ojumble of itself. And the equilibrium of 
terror alone can allow a regulated opposition to 
be established, for the strategy is structural 
never atomic. This regulated opposition can 
furthermore be ramified into a more complex 
scenario. The matrix remains binary. It will 
never again be a matter of a duel or open 
competitive struggle, but of couples of simul- 
taneous opposition. 

From the smallest disjunctive unity (ques- 
tion/answer particle) up to the great alternating 
systems that control the economy, politics. 



134 



The Orders of Simulacra 



world co-existence, the matrix does not change: 
it is always the 0/1, the binary scansion that is 
affirmed as the metastableorhorneostaticfbrm of 
the current systems. This is the nucleus of the 
simulation processes which dominate us. It can 
be organized as a play of unstable variations, 
from polyvalence to tautology, without threat- 
ening the strategic bipolar form: it is the divine 
form of simulation. 

Why are there two towers at New York's 
World Trade Center? AD of Manhattan's great 
buildings were always happy enough to affront 
each other in a competitive verticality, the 
result of which is an architectural panorama in 
the image of the capitalist system: a pyramidal 
jungle, all the buildings attacking each other. 
The system profiled itself in a celebrated image 
that you had of New York when you arrived 
there by boat. This image has completely 
changed in the last few years. The effigy of the 
capitalist system has passed from the pyramid 
to the perforated card. Buildings are no longer 
obelisks, but lean one upon the other, no longer 
suspicious one of the other, like columns in a 
statistical graph. This new architecture incarn- 
ates a system that is no longer competitive, but 
compatible, and where competition has disap- 



135 



Jean Baudrillard 



peared for the benefit of the correlations. (New 
York is the world's only city therefore that 
retraces all along its history, and with a 
prodigious fidelity and in all its scope, the actual 
form of the capitalistic system — it changes 
instantly in function of the latter. No European 
city does so.) This architectural graphism is that 
of the monopoly; the two W.T.C. towers, 
perfect parallelepipeds a K i- mile high on a 
square base, perfectly balanced and blind 
communicating vessels. The fact that there are 
two of them signifies the end of all competition, 
the end of all original reference. Paradoxically, if 
there were only one, the monopoly would not 
be incarnated, because we have seen how it 
stabilizes on a dual form. For the sign to be pure, 
it has to duplicate itself; it is the duplication of 
the sign which destroys its meaning This is 
what Andy Warhol demonstrates also: the 
multiple replicas of Marilyn's face are there to 
show at the same time the death of the original 
and the end of representation. The two towers 
of the W.T.C are the visible sign of the closure 
of the system in a vertigo of duplicatioa while 
the other skyscrapers are each of them the 
original moment of a system constantly 
transcending itself in a perpetual crisis and self- 



136 



The Orders of Simulacra 



challenge. 

There is a particular fascination in this 
reduplication. As high as they are, higher than 
all the others, the two towers signify neverthe- 
less the end of verticality, They ignore the other 
buildings, they are not of the same race, they no 
longer challenge them, nor compare themselves 
to them, they look one into the other as into a 
mirror and culminate in this prestige of 
similitude. What they project is the idea of the 
model that they are one for the other, and their 
twin altitude presents no longer any value of 
transcendence. They signify only that the 
strategy of models and commutations wins out 
in the very heart of the system itself — and New 
York is really the heart of it — over the 
traditional strategy of competition. The build- 
ings of Rockefeller Center still direct their gaze 
one at the other into their glass or steel facades, 
in the city's infinite specularity. The towers, on 
the other hand are blind and no longer have a 
facade. All referential of habitat, of the facade as 
face, of interior and exterior, that you still find 
in the Chase Manhattan or in the boldest 
mirror-buildings of the 60 's, is erased. At the 
same time as the rhetoric of verticality, the 
rhetoric of the mirror has disappeared. There 



137 



Jean Baudrillard 



remains only a series closed on the number two, 
just as if architecture, in the image of the 
system, proceeded only from an unchangeable 
genetic code, a definitive model. 

The Hyperrealism of Simulation 

AH of this defines a digital space, a magnetic 
field for the code, with polarizations, diffrac- 
tions, gravitations of the models and always, 
always, the flux of the smallest disjunctive 
unities (the question/ answer cell, that is like the 
cybernetic atom of meaning). We should 
compare this kind of control with the traditional 
repressive space, the police-space that still 
corresponded to a signifying violence. Space of 
reactionary conditioning that took its inspira- 
tion from the total Pavlovian disposition of 
programmed, repetitive aggressions, and which 
you find again multiplied in scale in "hard sell" 
advertising and in the political propaganda of 
the 1930's. Raw industrial violence, aiming to 
induce behaviors of terror and of animal 
obeisance. All of that no longer has any 
meaning. The totalitarian, bureaucratic concen- 
tration is a scheme which dates from the era of 
the mercantile law of value. The system of 



138 



The Orders of Simulacra 



equivalences imposes in effect the form of a 
general equivalent, and therefore the central- 
ization of a global process. Archaic rationality 
compared to that of simulation; there is no 
longer a single general equivalent, but a 
diffraction of models that plays a regulatory 
role. No longer the form of the general 
equivalent but that of distinctive opposition. 
From injunction you pass to disjunction by the 
code, from the ultimatum you pass to the 
solicitation, from the required passivity to 
models constructed all at once on the basis of 
the "active response" of the subject, on its 
implication, its "ludic" participation, etc., towards 
a total environmental model made out of 
incessant spontaneous responses of joyous 
feed-back and irradiating contact. This is the 
"concretization of the general atmosphere," 
according to Nicolas Schbffer, the great festival 
of Participation, made out of myriads of stimuli, 
miniaturized tests, infinitely divisible question/ 
answers, all magnetized by a few great models 
in the luminous field of the code. 

Here comes the time of the great Culture 
of tactile communication, under the sign of the 
technico- luminous cinematic space of total 
spa no-dynamic theatre 



139 



Jean Baudrillard 



This is a completely imaginary contact- 
world of sensorial mimetics and tactile mysticism; 
it is essentially an entire ecology that is grafted 
on this universe of operational simulation, 
multistimulatton and multiresponse We natur- 
alize this incessant test of successful adaptation 
in assimilating it into animal mimesis. "The 
adaptation of animals to the colors and forms of 
their milieu is a valid phenomenon for man" 
(Nicolas Schoffer), and the same for Indians, 
with their "innate sense of ecology"! Tropisms, 
mimetics, empathy: the complete ecological 
Evangel of open systems, with positive or 
negative feedback, is going to rush into this 
breech, with an ideology of regulation by 
information which is only the avatar, according 
to a more flexible rationality, of Pavlov's reflex. 
So it is that we graduate from electro-shock 
therapy to bodily expression as a means of 
conditioning mental health. Everywhere the 
disposition of force and forcing yield to 
dispositions of ambiance, with operationaliza- 
tion of the notions of need, perception, desire, 
etc. Generalized ecology, mystique of the 
"niche" and of the context, milieu- simulation 
right up to "Centers of Esthetic and Cultural 
Re-Animation" foreseen in the VHth Flan (why 



140 



The Orders of Simulacra 



not?) and Center of Sexual Leisure, constructed 
in the form of a breast, that will offer a 
"superior euphoria due to a pulsating ambiance. 
. . The workers from all classes will be able to 
penetrate into these stimulating centers." 
Spatiodynamic fascination, like this "total 
theatre" established "according to a hyperbolic 
circular disposition turning around a cylindrical 
cone": no more scene, cut-off point, or "regard": 
end of the spectacle as well as of the spectacular, 
towards the total environmental, fused to- 
gether, tactile, esthesia and no longer esthetics, 
etc. We can think of the total theatre of A rtaud 
only with black humor, his Theatre of Cruelty, 
of which this spatiodynamic simulaton is only 
an abject caricature. Here cruelty is replaced by 
"minimal and maximal stimulus thresholds." by 
the invention of "perceptive codes calculated on 
the basis of saturation thresholds." Even the 
good old "catharsis" of the classical theatre of 
the passions has become today homeopathy by 
simulation. So goes creativity. 

This also means the collapse of reality into 
hyperrealism, in the minute duplication of the 
real, preferably on the basis of another 
reproductive medium— advertising, photo, etc. 
From medium to medium the real is volatilized; 



141 



Jean Baudrillard 



it becomes an allegory of death, but it is 
reinforced by its very destruction; it becomes 
the real for the real fetish of the lost object — no 
longer object of representation, but ecstasy of 
denegation and of its own ritual extermination: 
the hyperreal. 

Realism had already begun this tendency. 
The rhetoric of the real already meant that the 
status of the latter had been gravely menaced 
(the golden age is that of language's innocence, 
where it doesn't have to add an "effect of 
reality" to what is said). Surrealism is still 
solidary with the realism it contests, but 
augments its intensity by setting it off against 
the imaginary. The hyperreal represents a 
much more advanced phase, in the sense that 
even this contradiction between the real and the 
imaginary is effaced The unreal is no longer 
that of dream or of fantasy, of a beyond or a 
within, it is that of a hallucinatory resemblance of the 
real with itself. To exist from the crisis of 
representation, you have to lock the real up in 
pure repetition. Before emerging in popart and 
pictorial neo-realism, this tendency is at work 
already in the new novel. The project is already 
there to empty out the real, extirpate all 
psychology, all subjectivity, to move the real 



142 



The Orders of Simulacra 



back to pure objectivity. In fact this objectivity is 
only that of the pure look — objectivity at last 
liberated from the object, that is nothing more 
than the blind relay station of the look which 
sweeps over it. Circular seduction where you 
can detect easily the unconscious desire of no 
longer being visible at all. 

This is certainly the impression that the 
new novel leaves: this rage for eliding sense in a 
minute and blind reality. Syntax and semantics 
have disappeared — there is no longer apparition, 
but instead subpoena of the object, severe 
interrogation of its scattered fragments — 
neither metaphor nor metonymy: successive 
immanence under the policing structure of the 
look. This "objective" minuteness arouses a 
vertigo of reality, a vertigo of death on the limits 
of representation-for-the-sake-of-represent- 
ation. End of the old illusions of relief, 
perspective and depth (spatial and psychological) 
bound to the perception of the object: it is the 
entire optic, the view becomeoperationalonthe 
surface of things, it is the look become 
molecular code of the object. 

Several modalities of this vertigo of 
realistic simulation are possible 



143 



Jean Baudrillard 



I. The deconst ruction of the real into 
details — closed paradigmatic declension of the 
object — flattening, linearity and seriality of the 
partial objects. 

A. The endlessly reflected vision: all the 
games of duplication and reduplication of the 
object in detail This multiplication is presented 
as a deepening, that is for a critial metalanguage, 
and it was doubtless true in a reflexive 
configuration of the sign, in a dialectic of the 
mirror. From now on, though, this indefinite 
refraction is only another type of seriality. The 
real is no longer reflected, instead it feeds off 
itself till the point of emaciation. 

ID. The properly serial form f Andy Warhol). 
Here not only the syntagmatic dimension is 
abolished, but the paradigmatic as well. Since 
there no longer is any formal flection or even 
internal reflection, but contiguity of thesame — 
flection and reflection zero. Like those two twin 
sisters in a dirty picture the charnel reality of 
their bodies is erased by the resemblance. How 
to invest your energies in one, when her beauty 
is immediately duplicated by the other? The 
regard can go only from one to the other, all 
vision is locked into this coming- an d-going. 
Subtle way of murdering the original, but also 



144 



The Orders of Simulacra 



singular seduction, where all attention to the 
object is intercepted by its infinite diffraction 
into itself (inverted scenario of the Platonic 
myth of the reunion of the separated halves of 
the symbol — here the sign multiplies like 
protozoans). This seduction is possibly that of 
death, in the sense that for sexual beings, death 
is possibly not nothingness, but simply the 
mode of reproduction anterior to the sexual. 
This generation by model along an endless 
chain that in effect recalls the protozoans and is 
opposed to a sexual mode that we tend 
inaccurately, to confuse with life itself. 

IV. But this pure mechanization is doubtless 
only a paradoxical limit: the true generating 
formula, that which englobes all the others, and 
which is somehow the stabilized form of the 
code, is that of binarity, of digitality. Not pure 
repetition, but the minimal separation, the least 
amount of inflection between the two terms, 
that is to say the "very smallest common 
paradigm" that the fiction of sense could 
possibly support. Combination of differentia- 
tion internal to the pictorial object and to the 
object of consummation, this simulation retreats 
in contemporary art to be no more than the 



145 



jean Baudrillard 



minute difference that still separates the 
hyperreal from hyperpainting. The latter 
pretends to extend right up to a sacrificial 
effacement before the real, but you know how 
all these prestigious elements in painting 
resuscitate in this minute difference: all of 
painting takes refuge in the border that 
separates the painted surface and the wall. And 
in the signature: metaphysical sign of painting 
and of the whole metaphysic of representation, 
at the limit where it takes itself for model (the 
"pure look") and turns back upon itself in the 
compulsive repetition of the code. 

The very definition of the real becomes: 
that of which it is possible to give an equivalent 
reproduction. This is contemporaneous with a 
science that postulates that a process can be 
perfectly reproduced in aset of given conditions, 
and also with the industrial rationality that 
postulates a universal system of equivalency 
(classical representation is not equivalence, it is 
transcription,, interpretation, commentary). At 
the limit of this process of reproducibility, the 
real is not only what can be reproduced, but that 
which is always already reproduced. The hyperreal. 

And so: end of the real, and end of art, by 
total absorption one into the other? No: 



146 



The Orders of Simulacra 



hyperrealism is the limit of art, and of the real, 
by respective exchange, on the level of the 
simulacrum, of the privileges and the prejudices 
which are their basis. The hyperreal transcends 
representation (cf, J.F. Lyotard, L'Art Vwanl, 
number on hyperrealism) only because it is 
entirely in simulation. The tourniquet of 
representation tightens madly, but of an 
implosive madness, that, far from eccentric 
(marginal) inclines towards the center to its 
own infinite repetition. Analogous to the 
distancing characteristic of the dream, that 
makes us say that we are only dreaming; but 
this is only the game of censure and of 
perpetuation of the dream. Hyperrealism is 
made an integral part of a coded reality that it 
perpetuates, and for which it changes nothing. 
In fact, we should turn our definition of 
hyperrealism inside out It is rmhty itself today that is 
hyperrealist. Surrealism's secret already was that 
the most banal reality could become surreal, but 
only in certain privileged moments that never- 
theless are still connected with art and the imag- 
inary. Today it is quotidian reality in its 
entirety — political, social, historical and eco- 
nomic—that from now on incorporates the 
Simula tory dimension of hyperrealism. We live 



147 



jean Baudritlard 



everywhere already in an "esthetic" hallucination 
of reality- The old slogan "truth is stranger than 
fiction," that still corresponded to the surrealist 
phase of this estheticizah'on of life, is obsolete. 
There is no more fiction that life could possibly 
confront, even victoriously — it is reality itself 
that disappears utterly in the game of reality- 
radical disenchantment, the cool and cybernetic 
phase following the hot stage of fantasy. 

It is thus that for guilt, anguish and death 
there can be substituted the total joy of the signs 
of guilt, despair, violence and death. It is the very 
euphoria of simulation, that sees itself as the 
abolition of cause and effect, the beginning and 
the end, for all of which it substitutes reduplica- 
tion. In this manner all closed systems protect 
themselves at the same time from the refer- 
ential — as well as from all metalanguage that the 
system forestalls in playing at its own meta- 
language; that is to say in duplicating itself in its 
own critique of itself. In simulation, the meta- 
linguistic illusion duplicates and completes the 
referential illusion (pathetic hallucination of the 
sign and pathetic hallucination of the real). 

"It's a circus," "It's theatre," "It's a movie," old 
adages, old naturalistic denunciation. These 
sayings are now obsolete. The problem now is 



148 



The Orders of Simulacra 



that of the saieUwithn of the rm\, the putting into 
orbit of an indefinable reality without common 
measure to the fantasies that once used to orna- 
ment it This satellization we find further natur- 
alized in the two- rooms- kite hen shower that 
they have launched into orbit — to the powers of 
space, you could say — with the last lunar module. 
The banality of the earthly habitat lifted to the 
rank'of cosmic value, of absolute decor — hypo- 
statized in space— this is the end of metaphysics, 
the era of hyperreality that begins. * But the 
spatial transcendence of the banality of the two- 
rooms, like its cool and mechanical figuration of 
hyperrealism, * says only one thing: that this 
module, such as it is, participates in a 
hyperspace of representation — where each is 
already technically in possession of the instant- 
aneous reproduction of his own life, where the 
pilots of the Tupolev that crashed at Bourget 
could see themselves die live on their own 
camera. This is nothing else that the short- 
circuit of the response by the question in the 
test, instantaneous process of re-conduction 
whereby reality is immediately contaminated 
by its simulacrum. 

There used to be, before, a specific class of 
allegorical and slightly diabolical objects: mir- 



149 



Jean Baudrillard 



rors, images, works of art (concepts?)— 
simulacra, but transparent and manifest (you 
didn't confuse the counterfeit with theoriginal), 
that had their characteristic style and savoir- 
faire. And pleasure consisted then rather in 
discovering the "natural" in what was artificial 
and counterfeit. Today, when the real and the 
imaginary are confused in the same operational 
totality, the esthetic fascination is everywhere. 
It is a subliminal perception (a sort of sixth 
sense) of deception, montage, seen aria — of the 
overexposed reality in the light of the models — 
no longer a production space, but a reading 
strip, strip of coding and decoding, magnetized 
by the signs— esthetic reality — no longer by the 
premeditation and the distance of art, but by its 
elevation to the second level, to the second 
power, by the anticipation and the immanence 
of the code. A kind of non-intentional parody 
hovers over everything, of technical simulation, 
of indefinable fame to which is attached an 
esthetic pleasure, that very one of reading and 
of the rules of the game. Travellingof signs, the 
media, of fashion and the models, of the blind 
and brilliant ambiance of the simulacra. 

A long time ago art prefigured this turning 
which is that today of daily life. Very quickly the 



150 



The Orders of Simulacra 

work turns back on itself as the manipulation of 
the signs of art: over- signification of art, 
"academism of the signifier," as Levi-Strauss 
would say, who interprets it really as the form- 
sign. It* is then that art enters into its indefinite 
reproduction: all that reduplicates itself, even if it 
be the everyday and banal reality, falls by the 
token under the sign of art, and becomes 
esthetic. It's the same thing for production, 
which you could say is entering today this 
esthetic reduplication, this phase when, expel- 
ling all content and finality, it becomes 
somehow abstract and non- figurative. It ex- 
presses then the pure form of production, it 
takes upon itself, as art, the value of a finality 
without purpose. Art and industry can then 
exchange their signs. Art can become a 
reproducing machine (Andy Warhol), without 
ceasing to be art, since the machine is only a 
sign. And production can lose all soda! finality 
so as to be verified and exalted finally in the 
prestigious, hyperbolic signs that are the great 
industrial combines, the '/i-mile-high towers or 
the number mysteries of the GNP. 

And so art is everywhere, since art if ice is at 
the very heart of reality. And so art is dead, not 
only because its critical transcendence is gone, 



151 



Jean Baudrillard 



but because reality itself, entirely impregnated 
by an aesthetic which is inseparable from its 
own structure, has been confused with its own 
image. Reality no longer has the time to take on 
the appearance of reality. It no longer even 
surpasses fiction: it captures every dream even 
before it takes on the appearance of a dream. 
Schizophrenic vertigo of these serial signs, for 
which no counterfeit, no sublimation is possible, 
immanent in their repetition— who could say 
what the reality is that these signs simulate? 
They no longer even repress anything (which is 
why. if you will, simulation pushes us close to 
the sphere of psychosis). Even the primary 
processes are abolished in them. The cool 
universe of digitality has absorbed the world of 
metaphor and metonymy. The principle of 
simulation wins out over the reality principle 
just as over the principle of pleasure. 

Translated by Philip Beilchmcm 



152 



The Orders of Simulacra 



Notes 

1- Counterfeit and reproduction imply always an 
anguish, a disquieting foreign n ess: the uneasiness before 
the photograph, considered like a witches trick— and 
more generally before any technical apparatus, which is 
always an apparatus of reproduction, is related by 
Benjamin to the uneasiness before the mirror- image. 
There is already sorcery at work in the mirror. But how 
much more so when this image can be detached from the 
mirror and be transported, stocked, reproduced at will < cf. 
Tk( Shiihit of Prague, where the devil detaches the image of 
the student from the mirror and hair asses him to death 
by the intermediary of this image). All reproduction 
implies therefore a kind of black magic, from the fact of 
being seduced by one's own image in the water, like 
Narcissus, to being haunted by the double and, who 
knows, to the mortal turning back of this vast technical 
apparatus secreted today by man as his own image Uhe 
narcissistic mirage of 'technique. McLuhan) and that 
returns to him, cancelled and distorted — endless repro- 
duction of himself and his power fo the limits of the 
world. Reproduction is diabolical in its very essence; it 
makes something fundamental vacillate. This has hardly 
changed for us: simulation (that we describe here as the 
operation of the code) is Still and always the place of a 
gigantic enterprise of manipulation, of control and of 
death, just like the imitative object (primitive statuette, 
image of photo) always had as objective an operation of 
black image. 



153 



Jean Baudrillard 



2. There is furthermore inMonodTs book a flagrant 
contradiction, which reflects the ambiguity of all current 
science. His discourse concerns the code, that is the third- 
order simulacra, but it does so still according to"sdentific" 
schemes of the second-order— objectiveness, "scientific* 
ethic of knowledge, science's principle of truth and 
transcendence. All things incompatible with the indeter- 
minable models of the third- order. 

3. "It's the feeble definition' of TV which condemns 
its spectator to rearranging the few points retained into a 
kind of n&strart work. He participates suddenly in the 
creation of a reality that was only just presented to him in 
dots: the television watcher is in the position of an 
individual who is asked to project his own fantasies on 
inkblots that are not supposed to represent anything." 
TV as perpetual Rorshach test. And furthermore: "The 
TV image requires each instant that we close' the spaces 
in the mesh by a convulsive sensuous participation t hat is 
profoundly kinetic and tactile." 

4. "The Medium is the Message" is the very slogan of 
the poitical economy of the sign, when it enters into the 
third-order simulation— the distinction between the 
medium and the message characterizes instead significa- 
tion of the second-order. 

5. The entire current "psychological" situation is 
characterized by this short-circuit 

Doesn't emancipation of children and teenagers, 
once the initial phase of revolt is passed andonce there has 
been established the principle of the nghl to emancipation, 
seem like the real emancipation of parents. And the young 
(students, high- schoolers, adolescents) seem to sense it in 



154 



The Order of Simulacra 



their always more insistent demand (though stil] as 
paradoxical) for the presence and advice of parents or of 
teachers. Alone at last, free and responsible, it seemed to 
them suddenly that other people possibly have absconded 
with their true liberty. Therefore, there is no question of 
"leaving them be" They're going to hassle them, not with 
any emotional or material spontaneous demand, but with 
an exigency that has been premeditated and corrected by 
an implicit oedipal knowledge, Hyperdependence (much 
greater than before) distorted by irony and refusal, parody 
of libidinous original mechanisms. Demand without content, 
without referent, unjustified, but for all that all the more 
severe— naked demand with no possible answer. The 
contents of knowledge (teaching) or of affective relations, 
the pedagogical or familial referent having been eliminat- 
ed in the act of emancipation, there remains only a 
demand linked to the empty form of the institution- 
perverse demand, and for that reason all the more 
obstinate- "Transferable" desire (that is to say non- 
referential, un- referential), desire that has been fed by 
tack, by the- place left vacant "liberated," desire captured 
in its own vertiginous image, desire of desire, as pure 
form, hyperreal. Deprived of symbolic substance, it 
doubles back upon itself, draws its energy from its own 
reflection and its disappointment with itself- This is 
literally today the "demand," and it is obvious that unlike 
the "classical" objective or transferable relations this one 
here is insoluble and interminable. 

Simulated Oedipus. 

Francois Richard: "Students asked to be seduced 
either bodily or verbally. But also they are aware of this 



155 



Jean Baudrillard 



and they play the game, ironically. 'Give us your 
knowledge, your presence, you have the word speak, 
you are there for that ' Contestation certainly, but not 
only: the more authority is contested, vilified, the greater 
the need for authority as such. They play at Oedipus also, 
to deny it all the more vehemently. The 'teach', he's 
Daddy, they say; it's fua you play at incest, malaise, the 
untouchable, at being a tease — in order to de-sex ualize 
finally." tike one under analysis who asks for Oedipus 
back again, who tells the "oedipal" stories, who has the 
"analytical" dreams to satisfy the supposed request of the 
analyst, or to resist him? In the same way the student 
goes through his oedipal number, his seduction number, 
gets chummy, close, approaches, dominates — but this 
isn't desire, it's simulation. Oedipal psychodrama of 
simulation ( neither less real nor less dramatic for all that). 
Very different from the real libidinai stakes of knowledge 
and power or even of a real mourning for the absence of 
same (as could have happened after '68 in the universities) 
Now we've reached the phase of desperate reproduction, 
and where the stakes are nil, the simulacrum is 
maximal — exacerbated and parodied simulation at one 
and the same time — as interminable as psychoanalysis 
and for the same reasons. 

The interminable psychoanalysis. 

There is a whole chapter to add to the history of 
transference and countertransference: that of their 
liquidation by simulation, of the impossible psycho- 
analysis because it is itself, from now on, that produces 
and reproduces the unconscious as its institutional 
substance. Psychoanalysis dies also of theexchangeof the 



156 



The Orders of Simulacra 



signs of the unconscious. Just" as revolution dies of the 
exchange of the critical signs of political economy. This 
short-circuit was well known to Freud in the form of the 
gift of the analytic dream, or with the "uninformed" 
patients, in the form of the gift of their analytic 
knowledge. But this was still interpreted as resistance, as 
detour, and did not put fundamentally into question 
either the process of analysis or the principle of 
transference- It is another thing entirely when the 
unconscious itself, the discourse of the unconscious 
becomes unh'ndable — according to the same scenario of 
simulative anticipation that we have seen at work on alt 
levels with the machines of the third order. The analysis 
then can no longer end, it becomes logically and 
historically interminable, since it stabilizes on a puppet- 
substance of reproduction, an unconscious programmed 
on demand— an impossible-tCHbreak-throughpoirvtaround 
which the whole analysis is rearranged. The messages of 
the unconscious have been short-circuited by the psycho- 
analysis "medium." This is libidinal hyperreaiism. To the 
famous categories of the real, the symbolic and the 
imaginary, it is going to be necessary toaddthehyperreal, 
which captures and obstructs the functioning of the three 
orders, 

6. Athenian democracy, much more advanced than 
our own, had reached the point where the vote was 
considered as payment for a service, after all other 
repressive solutions had been tried and found wanting in 
order to insure a quorum. 

7. In this sense we should radically criticize the 
projection that Levi-Strauss makes of binary structures 



157 



The Orders of Simulacra 



as "anthropological" mental structures and of dual 
organization as the basic structure of primitive society. 
The dualist form that Levi-Srauss would so love to apply 
to primitive society is never anything less than our own 
structural logic Our very own code, that selfsame one 
that we use to dominate the "archaic" societies, Levi- 
Strauss has the kindness to slip this to them under the 
guise of mental structures that are common to the whole 
human race. They will thereby be better prepared to 
receive the baptism of the Occident. 

8. The coefficient of reality is proportional to the 
imaginary in reverse which gives it is specific density. 
This is true of geographical and spatial exploration also. 
When there is no more territory virgin and therefore 
available for the imaginary, when the map covers the 
whde territory, then something like a principle of reality 
disappears. The conquest of space constitutes in this 
sense an irreversible threshold in the direction of the toss 
of the eartly referential This is precisely the hemorrhage 
of reality as internal coherence of a limited universe when 
its limits retreat infinitely The conquest of space follows 
that of the planet as the same fantastic enterprise of 
extending the jurisdiction of the real— to carry for 
example the flag, the technique, and the two-rooms- an d- 
kitchen to the moon — same tentative to substantiate the 
concepts or to territorialize the unconscious — the latter 
equals making the human race unreal, or to reversing it 
into a hyperreality of simulation. 

9. Ot that of the metal-plated caravan or super- 
market dear to hyperrea lists, or Campbell's Soup dear to 
Andy Warhol, or the Mona Lisa, since she too has been 



158 



The Orders of Simulacra 



satellized around the planet, as absolute model of earthly 
art, no longer a work of art but a planetary simulacrum 
where everyone comes to witness himself (really his own 
death) in the gaze of the future. 



159 



SEMIOTEXTIE) • NATIVE AGENTS SERIES 

Chris Kraus. Editor 

Airless Spaces Shulamitri Firestone 

Aliens & Anorexia Cnns Kraus 

Hannibal Letter, My Father Katny Acker 

How I Became One of the Invisible David Rattray 

If You're a Girl Anne Rower 

I Love Dick Chris Kraus 

Indivisible Fanny Howe 

Leash Jane DeLynn 

The Madame Realism Complex Lynne Ttlman 

The New Fuck You: Adventures In Lesbian Reading Eileen 
Myles & Ltz Kctt, eds 

Not Me Eileen Myles 

The Origin of the Species Barbara Bafg 

The Pain Journal Boo Flanagan 

The Passionate Mistakes and Intricate Corruption of One Girl 
in America MicheHeTea 

Reading Brooke Shields: The Garden of Failure Eldon Garnet 

Walking through Clear Water in a Pool Painted Black Cookie 
Mueller 



Revolt, She Said Julia Knsteva 

Sadness at Leaving ErjeAyden 

Simulations Jean Baudnttard 

69 Ways to Play the Blues Jurg laederach 

Soft Subversions Felix Guanan 

Speed and Politics Paul Virilio 

Still Black, Still Strong Dhoruba Bin Wahad, Mumta Abu-Jamal 
& Assaia Shakur 

Why Different?; A Culture of Two Subjects Luce Ingaray 

SEMIOTEXTIEI 'ACTIVE AGENTS SERIES 
Chris Kraus & Sylvere Lotringer, Editors 

The Empire of Disorder Alain Joxe 

Reporting from Ramatlah Amira Hass 



SEMIOTEXT(E) • THE JOURNAL 
Syivere Lotringer, Editor 

Imported; A Reading Seminar Rainer Ganabl, ed 
Polysexuality Francois Penaldi. ec 

SEMtOTEXTIE] -DOUBLE AGENTS SERIES 
Syivere Lotringer, Editor 

The Aesthetics of Disappearance Paul Virilio 

Archeology of Violence Pierre Clastres 

Burroughs Live (The Collected Interviews) Syivere Lotnnger, ed. 

Fatal Strategies Jean Baudnllard 

f oucault Live; Collected Interviews. 1961-1984 Sytvere 
Loinngei, ed- 

Hatred of Capitalism: A Semiotext(e) Reader Chns KrauS & 
Sytveie Lotrtnger, eds. 

Lost Dimension Paul Virilio 



SEMIOTEXTIE) 'FOREIGN AGENTS SERIES 
Sylvere Lotringer, Editor 

The Accident of Art Sylvere Lotringer & Paui Vmlto 

Chaosophy Felix Guattaii 

Crepuscular Dawn Paul Vmliofi Sytvere Lotringer 

Driftworks Jean-Frgngois Lyotard 

The Ecstasy of Communication Jean Baudnllard 

Fearless Speech Michel Foucault 

Forget Foucault Jean Baudnlta^d 

German ia He>ner Multer 

A Grammar of the Multitude Paofc Vtmo 

Inside & Out of Byzantium Nina Zivancevic 

In the Shadow of the Silent Majorities Jean Baudrillard 

Looking Back on the End of the World Jean Baudrillard, 
Paul Vinlio, etal 

Nomadology: The War Machine Gilles Deleuze & Felix G'jattari 

On The Line Gtltes Deieuze & Felix Guattah 

Politics of the Very Worst Paul Virilio 

The Politics of Truth Michel Foucault 

Popular Defense & Ecological Struggles Paul Vinlio 

Pure War Paul Vmho & Sylvere Lotringer 



